--- Page 1 ---
ALTERNATIVE
SANCTIONS AND
MEASURES LAW
هيئة التشريع والرأي القانوني
Legislation & Legal Opinion Commission
Second Edition
2019

--- Page 2 ---


--- Page 3 ---
LAW NO. (18) of 2017
WITH RESPECT TO ALTERNATIVE SANCTIONS
AND MEASURES
We, Hamad bin Isa Al-Khalifa, King of the Kingdom of Bahrain,
Having reviewed the constitution,
The Penal Code promulgated by the Legislative Decree No. (15) of 1976 as amended,
The Penal Procedures code promulgated by the l.egislative Decree No. (46) of 2002, as amended,
And the Law No. (18) of 2014 with respect to the issuance of the Reform and Rehabilitation
Institution Law,
The Consultative Council and Council of Representatives ratified the following Law which we
ratified and enacted:
Article 1
In the application of the provisions of this Law, an Alternative Sanction shall mean any one of the
sanctions set forth in Article 2 of this Law that may be handed down by virtue of a judgment or order
issued by a judge in substitution of the original sanction, in the circumstances stipulated in this Law.
An alternative measure shall mean any one of the measures set forth in Article 18 of this Law that may be
ordered by the Public Prosecution or a judge, as the case may be, in substitution of the pre-trial detention
measure, in the circumstances stipulated in this Law.
Article 2
The Alternative Sanctions are:
a. Community service.
b. House arrest, confinement within a particular place.
c. Refraining from entering a particular place or places.
d. Undertaking to refrain from menacing or communicating with particular persons or entities.
e. Submitting to electronic surveillance.
f.
Attending rehabilitation and training programs.
g. Remedying the damage that resulted from the crime.
Article 3
Community Service shall take effect through sentencing a convicted person, with his consent, to perform
unpaid community work with a certain institution.
1

--- Page 4 ---
The work to be performed shall, if possible, be similar to the profession of the convicted person and it
shall not be for more than one year and not exceeding eight hours a day.
The institutions to be served in and the types of work to be performed shall be determined by an order
issued by the minister concerned with justice affairs.
Article 4
House arrest or confinement within a particular place shall take effect through compelling a convicted
person not to leave a particular place of residence or a certain defined area.
The Minister of Interior shall issue an order to stipulate the procedures required for the implementation of
this alternative sanction and the determination of the circumstances and times during which a convicted
person can leave the place of confinement.
Article 5
Refraining from entering a particular place or places shall take effect through compelling a convicted
person to refrain from entering a particular place or geographical area associated with the crime.
The Minister of Interior shall issue an order to stipulate the procedures required for the implementation of
this alternative sanction and the determination of the circumstances and times during which a convicted
person can enter the prohibited place or places.
Article 6
Undertaking to refrain from menacing or communicating with particular persons or entities shall take
effect through compelling a convicted person to refrain from menacing, physically, verbally or by other
ways and to prevent him from communicating, through any means of communication, with persons or
entities associated with the crime.
Article 7
Being subject to electronic surveillance shall take effect through monitoring a convicted person's
movement by one or more means of clectronic surveillance available to the Ministry of Interior.
Article 8
Attending rehabilitation and training programs shall take effect through compelling a convicted person to
undergo one or more of the medical, psychological, social, educational, occupational or industrial
rehabilitation and training programs to reform his behavior.
2

--- Page 5 ---
The minister concerned with justice affairs shall, in coordination with the Minister of Interior, issue an
order to detertnine the rehabilitation and training programs and stipulate the procedures for implementing
them.
Article 9
Remedying the damage that resulted from a crime shall take effect through compelling a convicted person
to restore the affected thing to its original state, repair it or pay compensation in lieu thereof.
Article 10
When handing down an imprisonment sentence for a period not exceeding one year, a judge may
substitute such sentence, after determining the term of the imprisonment, by one or more of the alternative
sanctions set forth in Article (2) of this Law.
Article 11
When handing down an imprisonment sentence for a period exceeding one year but not more than five
years or imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years, a judge, may if he determines that the
accused is not fit for serving such imprisonment term due to his personal or medical conditions based on
reports that he requests or submitted to him, substitute such sentence after determining the term of the
imprisonment by house arrest or confinement within a particular place, solely or accompanied with any
other alternative sanction set forth in Article (2) of this Law.
Article 12
Any convicted person sentenced to imprisonment of not more than one year or physical coercion may
request the execution judge to substitute the imprisonment sentence or physical coercion by one or more
of the alternative sanctions set forth in Article (2) of this Law. The execution judge shall decide upon
such request after hearing the statements of the Public Prosecution.
Article 13
The Reform and Rehabilitation Institution may apply to the executive judge to substitute the original
sanction by one or more of the alternative sanctions set forth in Article (2) of this Law, for a period
equivalent to the remaining period of the sanction or the total number of sanctions, if the convicted person
satisfies the following conditions:
1. He shall have served half the term of the sanction or sanctions he was sentenced to.
2. He shall be of good conduct.
3

--- Page 6 ---
3. His release from prison shall not constitute a publie security risk.
4. He shall have paid all the financial liabilities handed down against him by a criminal court, unless
it is impossible for him to pay it.
The execution judge shall decide upon such request after hearing the statements of the Public Prosecution.
The provisions of Part Five of Book Five of the Criminal Procedure Code promulgated by Legislative
Decree No. (46) of 2002 shall apply to the enforcement of the alternative sanctions.
Article14
Subject to the provisions of Article (3) of this Law, the term of an alternative sanction set forth in
Paragraphs (a) to (f) of Article (2) of this Law shall be equivalent to the term of the original sanction
handed down against the convicted person or the remaining period of such term as the case may be. The
judge shall determine the term of the alternative sanction set forth in Paragraph (g) of the same Article.
Article 15
The concerned entity at the Ministry of Interior shall, under the supervision of the Public Prosecution,
monitor the enforcement of the alternative sanctions. The Minister of Interior shall issue an order to name
such concerned entity and determine the mechanism of enforcement.
Article 16
The execution judge shall be the one to look into all disputes related to the enforcement or repeal of an
alternative sanction, and issue all the decisions and orders related thereto, after hearing the statements of
the Public Prosecution. He shall in particular have the following powers:
a. To order the enforcement of the original sanction or the remaining period thereof, or to enforce
another alternative sanction in case of refusal by a convicted person to abide to or the breaching
of any alternative sanction during the term of enforcement thereof.
b. To order extension to the term of the enforcement of the alternative sanction set forth in
paragraph (g) of Article (2) of this Law.
c. To review the reports submitted to him relating to the enforcement of the alternative sanction and
take decisions in respect thereof.
d. All other jurisdiction set forth in this Law.
The decisions and orders issued by the execution judge shall be effective immediately, even if an appeal
is filed against them before the Supreme Criminal Appeal Court.
4

--- Page 7 ---
Article 17
The provisions of law governing the original sanction for a crime shall apply to the alternative sanctions.
Imposing an alternative sanction shall not affect the enforcement of supplementary sanctions.
Article 18
A member of the Public Prosecution or a judge, as the case may be, may impose upon an accused one or
more of the following alternative measures in substitution of the pre-trial detention measure:
a. House arrest or confinement within a particular place.
b. To represent himself to a police station at specific times.
C.
Refraining from entering a particular place or places.
d. Undertaking to refrain from menacing or communicating with particular persons or entities.
e. Submitting to electronic surveillance.
The enforcement of these alternative measures shall take effect in accordance with the procedures
stipulated for the enforcement of alternative sanctions set forth in Articles (4), (5), (6) and (7) of this Law.
Article 19
The provisions of law governing pre-trial detention shall apply to house arrest or confinement within a
particular place as an alternative measure to pre-trial detention.
Article 20
An accused may file a complaint against an order issued by the Public Prosecution imposing upon him
any one of the alternative measures set forth in Article (18) of this Law, except for the house arrest or
confinement within a particular place measure, to a High Criminal Court session held in the consultation
room. If his complaint is refused, he shall have the right to file a new complaint whenever a month lapses
after the date of the refusal of the complaint. The measures shall in all circumstances end with the lapse of
six months from the date of the commencement of such measures, all this, unless the case is referred to a
competent court, in such case the court shall decide on whether to impose or repeal an alternative
measure.
Article 21
The issuance of an order to impose alternative measures set forth in Article (18) of this Law shall not
prevent a member of the Public Prosecution from issuing a new order to arrest or detain the accused if
evidence against him became stronger or if he evaded compliance with, breached or refused to abide by
the alternative measures, or if any circumstances occurs and calls for the issuance of such an order.
5

--- Page 8 ---
If the order to impose an alternative measure is issued by a judge, the new order to arrest or detain an
accused shall be issued by the same judge who issued the order to impose an alternative measure as
substitute to the pre-trial detention.
Article 22
Any person who evades the enforcement of any alternative sanction or alternative measure set forth in
Paragraph (a) of Article (18) of this Law shall be sanctioned by imprisonment for a period not exceeding
two years or a fine not exceeding BD 200.
Any person who assists an offender to evade or breach the enforcement of an alternative sanction or an
alternative measure shall be sanctioned by the same aforesaid punishment.
If the crime mentioned in the two preceding paragraphs has been committed by two persons or more with
the use of threat or violence against persons or property, or if it has been committed with the use of
weapons or the threat to use them, this shall be regarded as an aggravating circumstance.
Any person appointed by the concerned authority to supervise the enforcement of any of the alternative
sanctions or measures and breached his duty shall be sanctioned by imprisonment for a period not
exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding BD 100.
In all circumstances referred to above, the imprisonment sentence may be replaced by one of the
alternative sanctions in accordance with the provisions of this Law.
Article 23
The provisions of the Gieneral Section of the Penal Code promulgated by Legislative Decree No. (15) of
1976 and the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure promulgated by Legislative Decree No. (46)
of 2002 shall apply to any matter not covered by a specific provision in this Law, to the extent that does
not conflict with its provisions.
Article 24
The Prime Minister and ministers, each in his respective capacity, shall implement the provisions of this
Law which shall come into force from the day following the date of its publication in the Official Cazette.
Signed: Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa
King of the Kingdom of Bahrain
Issued at Rifa'a Palace
on 25 Shawwal 1438 Hijra
Corresponding to 19 July 2017 A.D.
6

