--- Page 1 ---
NATIONAL ACTION CHARTER
KINGDOM OF BAHRAIN
هيئة التشريع والإفتاء القانوني
Legislation & Legal Opinion Commission
2013

--- Page 2 ---
Amiri Order No (17) of 2001
on the ratification of the National Action Charter
We, Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, Amir of State of Bahrain.
Having reviewed the Amiri Order No. (36) and (43) on
constituting the Supreme National Committee to draft the
National Action Charter,
And reviewed the draft of National Action Charter,
And Amiri Order No. (8) of 2001 with respect to the
referendum on the draft of National Action Charter,
And resolution of the Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs
No.(6) of 2001 with respect to declaration of referendum
result on the draft of National Action Charter,
And upon our certainty of the peoples acceptance and
support to the National Action Charter, demonstrated by the
outcome of the referendum,
And our ratification of the will of the Bahrain people to
accept the dratt of National Action Charter, which confirms
their desire to have a better and a more prosperous future, to
broaden the horizons of Bahrain for a future desired by us to
be pompous and more beautiful for us and the generations to
come,

--- Page 3 ---
Hereby order the following:
Article 1
We rectify the National Action Charter attached hereto,
which was approved by our loyal people on the referendum
dated 14 and 15 of February 2001,
Article 2
This order shall be published in the Official Gazette and
shall come into effect from the date of its publication.
Signed: Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa
Amir of the state of Bahrain.
Issued at Rifa'a Palace
On: 22 Thual-Qidah 1421 Hijra,
Corresponding to: 16 February 2001 A.D

--- Page 4 ---
Preamble
The sublime address of H.H the Amir Shaikh Hamad bin
Isa Al Khalifa
The sublime address of H.H the Amir Shaikh Hamad bin Isa
Al Khalifa, at the audience, rendered to the head and
members of the Supreme National Committee assigned to
draft the national charter, who submitted to H.H, the draft of
the national action charter of the state of Bahrain, at Riffa,
on Saturday, 7th Ramadan 1421 h, 23rd December 2000.
In the Name of God, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Dear brothers and sisters,
May peace and God's blessings be upon you.
Today is the dearest day in the history of Bahrain and a
orious moment in our dignified and honoured path. M
›nfidently can say that your accomplishing of the nation
che mo demit ine te polricat ructue at fhe tae incudinr
the systems and institutions, in such a way that meet the
towards further civilized progress and rising.
It is our pride to achieve this national unanimity in the form
of the charter draft after several
gatherings
of useful
dialogue with various sectors of our civilized community
3

--- Page 5 ---
and its representatives. Accordingly you had gathered within
the context of this national committee and from various
positions,
thus
enriching the common visions
with
constructive views and free exchange of opinion in free
Bahrain, to strengthen the principles of human coexistence
and civilized dialogue which embodied, and over ages, the
democratic feature and practices that are formulated today
by the charter. You have in fact demonstrated your ability to
process this pioncering mission in the history of the nation
and proved your competence to shoulder the task for the
interest of all citizens.
These are only the first step that precedes a number of
dialogue and forums within our national course, fortunately
coinciding with last ten days of Ramadan, a document which
shall be remembered by next generations as Ramadan
document.
Dear brothers and sisters
With every confidence and pride we receive from you the
draft of the charter, the allegiance document, as you wished,
and it will
be the subject of our recognition and
consideration and a responsibility that we care for as we,
pledged since the beginning and in light of our great
confidence in the awareness of this dear citizens.
This will be submitted to
a general public referendum
according to the procedures in this regard, in order receive
the opinions and views of the people. Once we are satisfied
that there is general consensus about this draft, we shall
endorse it as a basis for our national path, upon which we
shall be guided in processing the national action and
complement the modernizing of the state institutions and its
4

--- Page 6 ---
constitutional power, while implement in each stage those
parts deemed to be in line with the aspirations of the
citizens,
Dear brothers and sisters
We shall remain hand in hand and united over the course of
this process and I hereby stretch my hand to every single
Bahraini, men and women, as it showed the pledge of
Allegiance and it will show a new formula of allegiance.
The new formula and the national modernization shall be the
features of our best days to come.
May peace and God's blessings be upon you.

--- Page 7 ---
Bahrain's History: Civilization and Contemporary
Awakening
Since the dawn of history, Bahrain has had its name carved
in bold letters in the annals of civilizations. Geographically,
the name "Bahrain" might have sometimes broader,
sometimes narrower definition. In any case, however, it has
always been here, at this archipelago, the heart of the Gulf
region, where all civilizations conjured. Dilmun was the
meeting place of the Old World that extended from Somer in
Mesopotamia, to Majan in Oman on to the Sind civilization.
It established a name for Bahrain as a center of free trade
and a vital port of call for the entire Old World for centuries,
a fact that contributed to the prosperity of Bahrain over the
ages. Even before Islam, Bahrain had been known as a land
of diversity in terms of ideologies and beliefs, a rare case in
those times by any measurement. In such a climate of
spiritual and
intellectual tolerance, culture flourished,
religions coexisted and the poets of Bahrain contributed
monumental works to Arabic poetry on human thought and
being.
In fact, they heralded a new era in which Arabs would play a
historic role. Bahrain was one of the lands that welcomed
the call of Islam at an early date and willingly converted to
Islam. Furthermore, Bahrain was an early, staunch supporter
of Islam. It carried its banner across the Gulf down to India.
Bahrain's
resources substantially contributed to the
"Beitulmal" (or Treasury) of Islam's realm. Its men of letters
made early contributions to Islamic civilization through their
jurisprudence and literary works particularly during the
Caliphate period. Such
contribution made all the more
natural that Islamic value of tolerance, justice and piety have
been deeply embedded into the very conscience of the
6

--- Page 8 ---
Bahrain people. The physical geography of Bahrain offered
a prolific environment for human activities covering
agriculture, trade, and diving. With a very favorable
geographic location and abundant resources, Bahrain was
always a temptation for invaders as well as those who
dreamt of fortune.
However, those invariably met with a Bahrain that was
always on the alert to repel any transgressor. The latest great
milestone in such a history of steadfastness was the
successful struggle launched by Arab rank and file under the
able command of Ahmed El Fateh late in 18th century
comprising the Zubarah and Bahrain region under the Al
Khalifa rule. Following came the call by the entire people of
Bahrain to Shaikh Isa bin Ali Al Khalifa to assume the rule
of the country as the guarantee against foreign domination.
This was the first manifestation of public will in
contemporary Bahrain. It has gone into the annals of history
as the first oath of allegiance to a young ruler who
epitomized his people's dream of a national rule. For the
next sixty-five years, this rule proved to be able to ensure
the country's security, to maintain the cohesion of the people
and their leadership and to maintain its political and
economic stability that helped Bahrain successfully steer
into modern times.
Despite foreign powers taking an adverse stand toward calls
by the people of Bahrain for Shaikh Isa bin Ali Al Khalifa to
constitute a Shura or (consultative) Council, the positive
response on his part came as a manifestation of a common
perception, of both the people and the leadership, of the
course national action should take. Shaikh Hamad bin Isa
bin Ali AL Khalifa, who succeeded his father as ruler
enjoying an oath of allegiance by his people, had realistic
7

--- Page 9 ---
perspective of international conflicts. With his forward
looking approach, he opened vistas the country to usher
itself into modern times. He introduced a modern education
system, an effective administration, modern municipal
facilities, and an appropriate legal framework. Thus, the
country was able to lay down an agenda for development
and transformation following the establishment of oil
industry in Bahrain. When Shaikh Salman bin Hamad Al
Khalifa took over as ruler in 1942, Bahrain was doing its
utmost to come to grips with ramifications of concurrent
World War 2, operations in terms of economic difficulties
and international and regional upheavals. Nevertheless,
Bahrain managed to surmount such difficulties and to
continue with its state building development, national unity,
people leadership, cohesion and participation agenda despite
pressures by foreign powers.
The reign of Shaikh Isa bin Salman Al Khalifa was one of
rich growth and political achievements. It goes to his credit
that he established the state of Bahrain. He proclaimed
Bahrain as an independent state with modern institution
thus, putting an end to foreign ambitions and claims. In a
survey conducted by a United Nations fact finding
commission, the entire people of Bahrain expressed their
unequivocal resolved to protect their fatherland as an Arab
independent state and renewed their oath of allegiance to
Shaikh Isa bin Salman Al Khalifa. In response, Shaikh Isa
promulgated the constitution of the state of Bahrain that
reflected true constitutional
and democratic principles.
Under Shaikh Isa bin Salman Al Khalifa, Bahrain gained its
full independence as
a state that upholds democracy,
institutions and rule of law. Shaikh Isa will ever be
remembered
for his historic milestone decisions on
launching real constitutionalism in Bahrain through free and
8

--- Page 10 ---
direct elections to form a national council under the
constitution. The unequivocal support expressed by the
people of Bahrain to H.H the Amir Shaikh Hamad bin Isa Al
Khalifa upon his assumption to
leadership, came as a
manifestation of the fact that the entire Bahraini people have
closed ranks behind his reign from the beginning.
Under H.H the Amir, Bahrain has witnessed a vigorous leap
forward to further democracy In response to people's
aspiration to a modem state that continues to enjoy security,
and prosperity, a state where constitutional
institutions capable of meeting the aspirations of both
leaderships and the peoples and where justice and rule of
law reign supreme, be completed. At this historic juncture,
the people of Bahrain are resolved to have a shining
morrow. They stand for freedom, equality, justice,
democracy and participation in governance by all. The state
of Bahrain that has gained political independence through a
joint struggle by both a wise leadership and a faithful
people, have preserved its unity and territorial integrity,
including its land and territorial waters that are neither
alienable nor a subject of compromise in any way and under
any circumstances. This is expressly reflected by article 1 of
the constitution of Bahrain.
The state of Bahrain has played an active role at political
arenas within Arab, Islamic and international tiers. It has
manifested its unwavering belief in its role as one of the
constituents of the Gulf Cooperation Council as well as its
resolve to closely work with other sisterly member states to
further galvanize the GCC system to meet the aspirations of
its peoples. Having established modern institutions based on
democracy, constitutional institutions and the rule of law
since its independence, having fully assumed its full role as

--- Page 11 ---
a state both in terms of its international relations as well as
its sovereign institutions that are based on justice, equality
and care for citizens rights since independence, in view of
H.H the Amir's aspirations to further deepen democracy
through
a
more
balanced structure that maintains
constitutional political participation of both government and
people, checks and balances, strengthens the judiciary's
mechanics and allows for the creation of a constitution
court, an auditor general and an administrative supervisory
authority; in view of the royal will to usher the country into
the third millennium as a truly modern one that is
empowered with a full-fledged political, constitutional frame
work conducive to proper responses to local, regional and
international developments; and in view of the need to cope
with new political, economic and social developments as
well as future challenges, building on Bahrain's experience
in political and economic realm over the last three decades.
It is
hereby resolved that national, political and
constitutional constants, including
the democratic,
constitutional monarchy under which the king serves his
people and symbolizes their independent identity and their
aspirations to progress, shall be attached to it. It is further
resolved that the constitution of the country shall be
amended in such a way as to allow making use of other
democracies'
experiences in broader participation
government and administration, including their putting in
place of a bicameral system where the legislature can have
the double advantage of learned and experienced citizens in
the Shura council on the one hand and the interaction with
people's opinion from all schools of thought through a
freely, directly elected chamber.
10

--- Page 12 ---
National Charter - Chapter I
Chapter I: Basic principles of the society
No society can be as stable for scores of centuries as
successful in building a distinctive civilization as Bahrain
unless the same is solidly attached to a set of core values
that ensure its cohesion, progress and development and
strengthens its entity as a state. With its solemn belief in
Islam and Arab identity and true to its deep-rooted
traditions, the Bahraini society has been attached to a set of
core principles that are congruent with Arab-lslamic values.
These core values and principles must be upheld and
safeguarded as they are co-opted by the entire society. They
have always been and maintained through generations since
time immemorial in the interest of both people and the state.
Hence, these core values and principles are sacrosanct.
Neither a public authority nor a citizen can compromise any
of them. These core values and principles can be enumerated
as follows:
First - Goals and basis of Government
Government goals are to protect the country, to maintain
national unity and to achieve comprehensive, sustainable are
protected. Development in political, socioeconomic, cultural
and other fields. Justice is the basis of government. Equality,
rule of law, liberty, security, peace, education, social
solidarity and equal opportunity are all core principles of the
society that are ensured by the state. Over the years, those
core values solemnly attached to by the Amir, government
and people of Bahrain have been the basis of government.
They are reinforced by solidarity, cooperation and cohesion
between the ruler and the people. Justice is one such
principle that has remained an article of faith that is further

--- Page 13 ---
ensured with the upholding of values including solidarity
and cordiality.
Second - Protection of individual freedoms and equality
Individual freedoms quality, justice and equal opportunity
are core principles of the society. The State shoulders the
responsibility of ensuring them for all citizens on an equal
footing. This is based on a broader principle, namely, that
people are equal insofar as human dignity is concerned, a
principle that has been consecrated by Islam since fourteen
centuries. Addressing believers during his 'Hajjatul Wada'a
(or the last pilgrimage). Prophet Mohammed laid emphasis
on this principle by saying that people are as equal as dents
of a comb are, that no Arab claims a preference over an
'Ajami' (or a non-Arab) and no white man can claim
preference over a black man except on the basis of
righteousness and good deeds. A natural flow of this great
principle of Islam and indeed
I humanity is a set of related
principles, namely:
1), All citizens are equal before the law in terms of rights
and duties, without distinction of race, origin,
language, religion or belief. This has been reiterated
by H.H. the Amir in his first address to the people in
the wake of his assumption to the power.
(2
Personal liberty is ensured under the law. Unless
according to procedure established by the law and
under judicial supervision, no person shall be
arrested, detained in custody, inspected or put under
house arrest, restricted residence or movement.
(3
No person shall in any way be subjected to any kind
of physical or moral torture, inhumane, humiliating or
indignant treatment. Any confession or utterance
12

--- Page 14 ---
(4
(5
(6
(7
obtained under torture, threatening or persuasion shall
be null and void. In particular, an accused shall not be
subjected to any physical or moral harm. Law ensures
punishment of those who commit an offense of
torture, a physically or psychologically harmful act.
An offense and punishment for the same shall be
established only by law. No person shall be convicted
of any offence except for violation of a law in force at
the time of the commission of the act charged as an
offence.
Punishment is individual. An accused person remains
innocent until convicted in a fair trial in which all
guarantees are provided with a view to ensuring to an
accused
person the right to defense throughout
investigation and prosecution under law. A person
accused of a felony shall have the right to be
defended by a lawyer of his choice. The right to
litigation is ensured under law.
Places of residence are inviolable. Unless authorized
by its legal occupants, no place of residence shall be
entered or inspected. However, in case such an entry
or inspection is deemed extremely necessary by way
of exception, such an entry or inspection may be
carried out in cases specified by law and under
judicial supervision.
Personal correspondence shall enjoy inviolability and
secrecy. Mail, cable, telephone, electronic and other
correspondence shall be protected. Save in cases
where law deems it necessary, and subject to judicial
supervision, such
correspondence
shall
not
be
censored or inspected.
13

--- Page 15 ---
Third - Freedom of belief
The state ensures freedom of belief. Freedom of conscience
shall be absolute. The state maintains inviolability of houses
of worship and guarantees freedom to practice religious rites
according to considered custom of the land.
Fourth - Freedom of expression and publishing
Every citizen shall have the right to express himself orally,
in writing or in any other way of expression of personal
opinion or creativity. Under this law, freedom of scientific
research, publishing, press and printing are ensured within
the scope specified by law.
Fifth - Civil Society Activities
With a view to enabling the society to make use of all civil
capabilities and activities, the state ensures the freedom to
form non-governmental, scientific, cultural, professional
associations and unions at a national level for legitimate
purposes through peaceful means under terms and
conditions as may be prescribed by law. No one shall be
forced to join an association or union or to remain member
thereot ®
Sixth - Family as the basis of society
Based on the firm belief that family is the nucleus of the
society and that good family is key to a cohesive society as
well as key to upholding religious and ethical values and
national sense of belonging, the state protects the legal form
of family as well as maternity and childhood, provides care
to children, protects them from exploitation and moral,
14

--- Page 16 ---
physical and spiritual negligence. In particular, the state
Pays special attention to physical, moral and
development of youth. In this
In mis riape
mental
respect, the state ensures
necessary social
security for citizens in cases of aging,
invalidity, orphanage, widowing and unemployment. The
state also secures social insurance services for citizens in
such cases. The state secures health care and puts in place
health policies that are conducive to achieving the objective
of health for all. The state ensures the solidarity of the
society in sharing burdens arising from natural calamities
and disasters, compensation of those who may be injured
due to war or on account of military duty. The state
endeavors to support women's rights and the enactment of
laws on protection of family and family members.
Seventh - Employment as both a duty and a right
Employment is a duty of every citizen. This is in the interest
of individual dignity and public good. Subject to public law
and order, every citizen has the right to practice a profession
or to carry on any occupation, trade or business. Taking into
account that save in a case prescribed by law for a national
necessity and against a fair consideration, no one shall be
forced into a specific job, the State ensures employment
opportunities under fair terms and conditions for citizens
within national economic development programs. Subject to
rules of social justice, the law organizes employer-
employee relations on an economic basis.
Eighth - Education, culture and science:
The state promotes science, literature and arts. It encourages
scientific research and ensures education
and cultural
services for citizens. Education shall be compulsory and free
15

--- Page 17 ---
in initial stages as may be prescribed by law. Also law
prescribed literacy plans. Law organizes religious education
and pays attention to civics, building citizens personalities
with a solid sense of belonging to national unity and Arab
nationalism through all stages and disciplines of education.
Universities are beacons of intellectual radiance and
scientific advances
a
fact that necessitates ensuring
academic freedom, the practice thereof and maximizing their
access to knowledge. The state encourages private education
and the establishment of private universities and institutes.
In the same vein, it shall support science and technology
research institutions, a better linkage between education
system and labour market with a
view to ensuring
availability of qualified labour force that meet current and
future requirements.
National Charter - Chapter II
Chapter Il: Government System
For centuries, ever since the Al-Khalifa ruling family
assumed rule of the country, Bahraini society has been
distinctive as to the basis of relationship between the ruler
and the people. This has been one of cohesion, direct contact
and mutual understanding in the interest of both individuals
and the country. True to this tradition, the people of Bahrain
now have the resolve that salient features of the government
system in the country should be as follows.
First - The Amir
Government system of Bahrain shall be a constitutional
monarchy as may be prescribed by the constitution and the
Amiri Decree on succession. The Amir is the head of state.
His person is inviolable. He is the Supreme Commander of
16

--- Page 18 ---
Armed Forces, the symbol of national stability and the
fulcrum of government system of the state of Bahrain. The
Amir exercises his powers through ministers who are
accountable to him. He appoints to, and relieves from,
premiership and ministerial posts within his powers as
prescribed by the constitution.
Second - Constitutional Form of the State
In view of the stability enjoyed, progress achieved, strides
made and challenges surmounted by Bahrain by the Grace of
God Almighty, and in view of the fact that it has assumed its
full-fledged role as a state both in terms of international
relations and sovereign institutions based on equality of all
citizens, common good and national unity, it is deemed
proper that Bahrain should join democratic constitutional
monarchies with
a view to meeting peoples aspirations to
further progress.
Third- Islamic Shari'a and Legislation
Islam is the religion of the state. Islamic Shari'a is the
principal source of legislation.
Fourth - People as the source of all powers
Government system of the state of Bahrain is a democracy
where all powers vest with the people. Sovereignty is
exercised as prescribed by the constitution.
Fifth - Separation of Powers
With a view to consecrating a stable democracy, the
government system is based on checks and balances, i.e., the
17

--- Page 19 ---
separation of, and cooperation among, the three powers
namely, the legislature, the executive and the judiciary as set
forth in the constitution. H.H the Amir is at the helm of the
three powers.
Sixth - Rule of Law and Independence of the Judiciary
Government in the state of Bahrain is based on the rule of
law. The independence and immunity of the judiciary are
two key guarantees for protecting rights and freedom. The
state shall complete the judicial system as prescribed in the
constitution. It shall specify the judicial authority vested
with the jurisdiction over disputes as to whether a given law
or executive regulations are consistent with the constitution.
The state shall specify a judicial authority vested with the
jurisdiction of the Attorney General.
Seventh - People's right to participation in Public Affairs
Citizens, men and women alike, have the right to participate
in public affairs and political rights including suffrage and
the right to contest as prescribed by law.
National Charter - Chapter III
Chapter III: Economic Fundamentals of the Society
The state of Bahrain has made great strides in the field of
economic development with a view to raising per capita
income. This has been achieved despite high population
hah popuatien
density and scarce natural resources including land and
water. It is due to wise policies put in place by the leadership
and government to ensure a streamlined effective use of
available resources that Bahrain has achieved such
an
outcome. This has helped Bahrain achieve a higher level of
18

--- Page 20 ---
human development and economic freedom. However,
policies that would ensure a stable economic growth rate
that offsets high population growth rate must be put in place.
This charter reiterates that the state of Bahrain is solemnly
attached to the following economic fundamentals:
First - The Principle of Free Economy
The economic system of the state of Bahrain is based on
individual initiative, freedom of capital movement in terms
of investment and transfer. It lays emphasis on the role of'
private sector in resource development as well as in
activating the economy. Over the year, this economic system
has provided for a
tangible economic and investment
activity and resulted in substantial capital inflows for
investment. An open-door policy must be accompanied by a
new public administration mindset, one that is oriented to
streamlined procedure,
transparency, elimination of
jurisdictional overlapping, improved services and updated
economic legislation within a framework of integrity and
equal opportunity. In order for auditing and administrative
supervision to be effective and for bureaucracy to become
more transparent, there is a need to institute an Auditor
General and an Administrative Supervisory Authority.
Second - Private Ownership
Private ownership is inviolable. Subject to law, every person
has the right to dispose of his property. Subject to a fair
compensation, a private property shall be expropriated only
for public good purposes within the scope set forth in and as
prescribed by law.
19

--- Page 21 ---
Third - Economic Justice and Balanced contracts
Private ownership, capital and work are individual rights of
a social nature. Law organizes such rights and the practice
thereof on an economic and socially equitable basis. Law
determines rules that ensure a alanced relationship among
elements of production as well as balanced contractual
relationship.
Fourth - Diversification of Economic Activity and
Sources of National Income
The state of Bahrain has been a pioneer of diversification of
economic activity and sources of national income among
Gulf Arab countries. The idea was to avoid dependence on a
single main source of income, to be able to ensure a
reasonable standard of living for future generations and to
avoid vulnerability to external economic fluctuation. As a
result, Bahrain has grown into an important regional
financial center and an internationally acclaimed tourist
attracting point. Through support made available to
manufacturing, high value added, informatics and services
industries, it has been possible to develop a platform for
economic
development and to offer
employment
opportunities to citizens.
Fifth - Environment and Wildlife
Due to increasing pressure on scarce natural resources, the
state of Bahrain has been bent upon rationalizing utilization
of natural resources, environment friendly development and
public health. In so doing, it takes into account worldwide
trends in preventing, and addressing, major environmental
problems. This is being done through a national environment
20

--- Page 22 ---
protection strategy, taking appropriate legal measures and
procedures with a view to reducing pollution from different
sources. Other incentives being put in place include: offering
facilities to manufacturers to shift to clean production anc
requiring that Environment Impact Assessment (ELA) be
made before a project is launched. Moreover, the State puts
in place measure to protect wildlife, particularly different
habitats ot tauna and flora of which Bahrain is famous. This
is being done through developing appropriated plans for
land use and coastal zone management and delimitation of a
system of sanctuaries such as the Al-Areen and Hawar
sanctuaries, the latter along with surrounding waters being
of a worldwide fame for its rare species of animals and
birds.
Sixth - Public property and natural resources
Public property is inviolable. It is incumbent upon every
citizen to protect the same while public authorities are under
duty to take all necessary measures to maintain the same. All
natural resources are a property of the State that shall
maintain, and put in place best ways and means to utilise,
the same.
Seventh - Labour and training
The State of Bahrain maintains that the greatest assets in it
are its own citizens who have proved themselves in
educational and cultural attainment, and distinctively so.
Therefore,
providing citizens with support through
continuous training and retraining would ensure infusing
fresh blood and experience into labour market, with ensuring
greater employment opportunities for citizens.
21

--- Page 23 ---
National Charter - Chapter IV
Chapter IV: National Security
National security is the safeguard of the country, its territrial
integrity and its socioeconomic and political gains. It
supports comprehensive development efforts particularly in
changing regional and international circumstances. The
fulcrum of national security is to strengthen Bahrain
Defence Force (BDF) with a view to enabling the same to
properly discharging its duty. Also it calls for providing
necessary equipment and other related requirements for
security forces to ensure that they perform their duty in
maintaining security and public law and order throughout
the country. It also makes it necessary to strengthen the
National Guards as a line of support for both BDF and
Security Forces. The entirety of these efforts would support
development efforts and maintain economic achievements,
protect every inch of land, sea and air of Bahrain. To serve
in national security system is a duty and a source of pride for
every citizen. Hence comes the importance of the BDF.
It is a symbol of national unity, a support to our brethren and
nation so as to ensure security and stability, not only for our
fatherland but also for our beloved Gulf region and, indeed,
the Arab World. Needless to say that, true to traditions of
Bahrain, BDF has been, indeed, a bastion to defend our
country's culture, ethics and well-being. It has been, since
day one, a message of goodwill and peace to the entire
mankind
1, an honest reflection of the values we all stand for.
The fact that H.H the Amir, the Supreme Commander of
BDF, is its first soldier and founder since 'the first light' is a
source of full-fledged faith therein. In a world where science
and technology advances
are revolutionary, sources of
threat, and harm to security are quite enormous, it becomes
22

--- Page 24 ---
all the more necessary to secure advanced weaponry and
security and defence systems. Of no less importance is the
human element. As those systems should be run by men,
policies related to training of qualified personnel and care
for the welfare of BDF personnel are sine qua non for
ensuring Bahrain's security.
In this respect, enhancing the capabilities and operational,
logistics and technical preparedness of BDF, through
training and organization of the best quality, must be
accorded the highest priority. The BDF's ability to fulfill its
mandate cannot be considered in isolation. It is organically
linked to a clear defence policy that is supported by detailed
programs designed to help achieve relevant objectives. This
calls for a regular review of our strategic vision, adaptation
to new technologies and definition of perceived sources of
threat.
National Charter - Chapter V
Chapter V: Democratic Life
Bahrain has experienced direct democracy ever since Al-
Khalifa assumed the rule of the country. Constant contact
and consultation between the ruler and people, free and full
access by the people to the ruler constant of the relationship
between the government and the people in Bahrain has
helped molding all government policies in a way that is
consistent with the wishes and interests of the people. In
fact, the government remains to be fully receptive to the
feelings of the people and, hence, has worked for the sole
purpose of serving public good. Against this background,
democracy has been reflected in practice through the
constitution and the elected National Council and further
enhanced by the addition of a Shura (consultative) council
23

--- Page 25 ---
that has proved to be a forum of serious discussion,
examination and advice over an entire matrix of public
issues of concern
the country. Moreover, the Shura
council has proved to be capable of being sufficiently
receptive to new developments. Its cooperation with the
government in public interest has been exemplary.
However, democracy is dynamic by nature, the wider its
horizon, the greater the practice thereof. In this respect, it is
worth mentioning that many a deep-rooted democracies are
bicameral ones, in which cases one chamber represented the
whole gamut of ideas and views on current affairs as
reflected by representatives of people from all brackets
whereas the other chamber would serve as a forum of
experts and expertise. The experience of those democracies
has proved that bi-cameral system is of great import in
political terms. In order to broaden people's participation in
public affairs, in line with principle of Shura, a basic Islamic
principle of the government system of Bahrain, and in true
belief of the right of the entire people to practice their
constitutional political rights and with a view to being
congruent with deep-rooted democracies, it is in the interest
of the state of Bahrain to adopt a bicameral system whereby
the legislature will consist of two chambers, namely one that
is constituted through free, direct elections whose mandate
will be to enact laws, and a second one that would have
people with experience and expertise who would give advice
as necessary. This bicameral structure of the legislature, a
balanced one indeed, would offer many interrelated
advantages, including people's participation in legislation
related
affairs and interaction among all ideas and
orientations within
single legislative council. This
proposed structure of the legislative council would require
an amendment of the constitution. It would achieve the dual
24

--- Page 26 ---
benefit of making use of wisdom and expertise on the one
hand and a variety of views of Bahraini electorate. Such an
amendment would certainly allow for a wider horizon for
democracy. This would support efforts being made for
development, stability and prosperity. It is a democracy that
supports social peace and national unity.
National Charter - Chapter VI
Chapter VI: Gulf Relations
The government and people of Bahrain firmly believe that
the peoples of GCC countries share the same goals, interests
and destiny. They share blood relationships that are further
galvanized by common history, culture and custom. These
have been sufficient grounds for Bahrain to be a founding
member of GCC along with other sisterly Gulf Arab
countries.
A serious cooperation among GCC countries is of utmost
importance to the highest interests of all sisterly member-
states, including maximum development for the countries
and peoples of GCC. In this respect, GCC has proved to be
capable of defending the freedom and sovereignty of its
member-states and to serve as a shield to protect their
independence. Therefore, the state of Bahrain shall always
work, with all its force, to strengthen GCC and to support
the just causes of its sisterly member-states. The state of
Bahrain considers this as one of its policy core constants that
are organically related to Bahrain belief that its security and
prosperity are part and parcel of those of other sisterly GCC
member-states.
The state of Bahrain shall work closely with its sisterly GCC
member-states for greater coordination, rapprochement and
25

--- Page 27 ---
integration within GCC particularly in those areas that still
require a more effective coordination such as economic
integration, defence cooperation, information as well as
people's participation in GCC organizations.
National Charter - Chapter VII
Chapter VIl: Foreign Relations
The state of Bahrain is proud of its Arab identity, its people
are part of the Arab nation and its territory is part and parcel
of the Arab world. This sense of belonging is reflected in
common language, religion and culture as in common hopes,
sufferings and history. Therefore, the state of Bahrain shall
continue to effectively and closely work with other sisterly
member-states of the league of Arab states. It shall continue
to pursue its efforts, in close cooperation with other Arab
countries, to further enhance the role of the Arab League in
order to maintain the same as a political and legal institution
that embodies Arab unity and furthers joint Arab action and
common will. The state of Bahrain reiterates its support of
all forms of inter-Arab economic cooperation.
The manifestations of this considered policy of the state of
Bahrain include the following: Bahrain offers unqualified
support to Arab just causes. It is committed to stand by Arab
brethren on their critical causes. In this respect, the state of
Bahrain supports and
stands for, Palestinian legitimate
rights, particularly the right of the Palestinian people to have
their independent state with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
It reiterates the need to secure the restoration, and respect, of
all Arab rights under international legal rights. Within the
Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC) and true to its
firm belief in Islamic values of right, good, justice and
peace, the state of Bahrain maintains the cooperation among
26

--- Page 28 ---
OIC members is of utmost importance to support national
independence and self-determination issues and to reach a
higher level of economic development in member states.
The state of Bahrain hopes that OIC will be more effective.
In the realm of international political relations, the state of
Bahrain, maintains that world and regional peace is a core,
strategic goal that justifies the greatest effort. Accordingly, it
reiterates that it is solemnly attached to the core principles of
peaceful settlement of all international disputes, prohibition
of use of force at the expense of the territorial integrity or
political independence of any country. The state of Bahrain
encourages and supports all international efforts for peaceful
settlement of regional disputes. It is noted that since it joined
the United Nations, Bahrain has contributed to all UN
activities, resolutions, events, agreements and conventions,
particularly those related to human rights, civil, political and
socioeconomic rights, women's rights as well as the work of
UN specialized agencies. In the realm of international
economic and trade relations, the considered policy of the
state of Bahrain stands for free international trade,
movement of investment, capital and labour while taking
into account national interests of individual countries. In so
believing, the state of Bahrain maintains that each country
enjoys the better title over its own natural resources that
cannot be disposed of under any external pressure or
dictation.
Out look
In view of the consensus of both the government and people
as to the content of this charter, In view of the fact that it
serves as a future national action instrument, and in view of
the fact
that it requires certain
amendments of the
27

--- Page 29 ---
conditions,
following:
it is deemed necessary to decide on the
First - The Name of the State of Bahrain
An amendment of the constitution shall determine the
official name of the state of Bahrain as may be adopted by
the Amir and the people of Bahrain.
Second - The Legislature
The provisions of part 4 Chapter 2 of the Constitution on the
legislature
shall be amended to be consistent with
democratic and constitutional developments worldwide in so
far as the introduction of bicameral system is concerned.
This would mean that one chamber is constituted through
free, direct elections whose mandate will be to enact laws
while a second one would have people with experience and
expertise who would give advice as necessary. Laws shall be
enacted as prescribed in detail by the constitution and in
congruence with
constitutional norms and traditions
followed in deep - rooted democracies. The people's
consensus on this charter is a true reflection of their will to
have a more stable, prosperous future under the leadership
of H.H Shaikh Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, Amir of the State
of Bahrain. We pray to God Almighty to help us be among
"those who faith fully observe their trusts and their
covenants" as described in the Holy Quran. In God
Almighty "we put our trust " Verily, God Almighty " is the
best to protect and the best to help".
28

