--- Page 1 ---
Harmonizing the CEDAW and Bahrini Legislation Constraints
'An International Perspective'
Harmonizing the CEDAW and Bahrini Legislation
Constraints
'An International Perspective'
Dr. Mohamed AM Ismail
LLB, LLM, PhD, (Cairo); FCI Arb (UK)
Consultant for the Legislation and Legal Opinion Commission,
Kingdom of Babrain
Vice-President of the Egyptian 'Conseil D'Etat'
State Prize Laureate, Academic Legal Research, Egypt
Abstract:
The Middle East: A Special Case in the International Legal Order:
I. The International Instruments in the field of Human Rights
Protection: Women's Rights
1. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948);
2. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
3. The International Covenant of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
4. The United Nations Convention of Elimination of All Kinds of
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW);
5. The CEDAW from Ratification to Implementation: An International
Perspective
6. The Regional Instruments in the Arab Countries: The Arab Charter for
Human Rights, 2004.
II. The CEDAW'S Value Added to the Coexisting and Overlapping
International, Regional and Domestic Equality and non-discrimination
Regime: The Actual Value Added of the CEDAW: Socio-economic Rights
as the Kingdom of Bahrain is a Democratic Welfare State.
III. The CEDAW at the Kingdom of Bahrain's National Legislation?
Challenges and Prospects
IV. The Interplay between the CEDAW and the Domestic Legal Regime
at the Kingdom of Bahrain: The Implementation and Domestication of
the CEDAW at the Kingdom of Bahrain
Women's Rights Legal framework at the Kingdom of Bahrain
1. Constitutional Framework
2. Legislative framework
V. Conclusions
12

--- Page 2 ---
البحوث بالانجليزية
Abstract:
The Middle East: A Special Case in the International Legal Order:
Cultural globalization and women's rights
Conceptual Background
The Middle East: A Special Case in the International Legal Order
The Division of the Middle East to British and French Colonies after World War
I, and the Influence of Various Legal Cultures upon the Middle East
The Ottoman Empire has a leading role in the MENA region centuries
ago and until the British and French imperialism controlled the region for
decades. The Ottoman Empire ruled the Arab countries through Islamic
Shari'a law and the legal and judicial systems in those countries applied the
Shari'a law.
The Arab world was divided into British and French colonies during the late
19th century and early 20th century, after the deterioration of the Ottoman
Empire. This division of the MENA region has diversified the character of
the region in many aspects. It is true that the region still has its Eastern
conservative character regarding family laws and women's rights despite the
forces of cultural and legal globalization which are reshaping new patterns
of women's legislation in the region1. These patterns of women's rights were
not recognized before in the MENA region. This practice appeared in the
second half of the 20th century, as a result of influence by social trends,
particularly in women's legislation in the MENA region. The division of the
Middle East into French and British colonies had a minor influence upon
the legal cultures in various Arab countries and also had a considerable
influence on the language and some social and cultural habits (norms) due
to the French influence on the Maghreb countries (Tunisia, Algeria and
Morocco). This French influence is not recognized in the Gulf countries.
Despite this controversy, most Arab countries, are influenced by the French
legal system in public law such as simple unified states, like the Kingdom
of Bahrain and Egypt. The Kingdom of Bahrain, and for instance Saudia
Arabia, Egypt, Morocco, Algeria, Libya, Kuwait, Oman and many other Arab
states are simple states and not federal states. These countries have written
Ismail, Mohamed A.M., Globalization and New International Public Works Agreements
in Developing Countries, Ashgate Publishing, Routledge, UK, 2011; International Investment
Arbitration, Lessons from Developments in the MENA Region, Ashgate Publishing, Routledge,
UK, 2013; and for the same author: Public Economic Law and New International Administrative
Contracts, El Halabi Publishing, Beirut, 2010, In Arabic. The latter book was awarded the State
Prize in Academic Legal Research in the Arab Republic of Egypt.
Volume 6 - @anoniya 13

--- Page 3 ---
Harmonizing the CEDAW and Bahrini Legislation Constraints
'An International Perspective'
Constitutions, and were greatly influenced by the French system, not only in
Civil Codes, but also in Constitutional Law and Administrative Law. Some
countries such as Egypt and Morocco have dual judicial systems like the
French system. Those countries have a special judicial organs specialized in
administrative disputes ' Le Conseil D'Etat'
The Civil Law Codification and Influence of the French Civil Napoleonic
Codes
Arab civil codes are based on Napoleonic codes. This is related to the
historical circumstances which characterized the region's legal order. After
the Arab revolutions in the 1950s and 1960s, a new era of the political,
constitutional and legal order began. It is appropriate to refer to the fact that
Arab legislation, in the past centuries, was the Islamic Law "Shari'a Law" or
"Figh,". Shari'a Law included the legal and religious framework relating to
family law and its practices. It is true that the history of law in most Arab
countries was a combination of the Shari' a and European laws. The legal and
judicial system, particularly in Egypt, was influenced by the combination of
the Shari'a and European Laws in many of the law branches.2
The Minor Diversity in the Middle Eastern and North African (MENA)
Countries, in Cultural, Economic, Social and Geographical Aspects
1-The cultural influence from Egypt to the Middle East began many centuries
before when the Egyptian civilization began around 7000 years ago, to be
the first nation in the Middle East and the world. Similarly to the cultural
globalization phenomenon nowadays, the flow of cultural, moral and legal
concepts started to flow from Egypt, in the beginning of the 20th century,
to the Arab region.
2-Meanwhile, the economic factor was in favour of the Gulf States which are
rich of its natural resources, such as oil and gas resources. The infrastructure
revolution started early in Gulf countries, on the second half of the 20th
century, after the discovery of huge oil and gas reservoirs. Parallel to the
infrastructure huge projects and developments in the Gulf, there was a
considerable revolution in all economic sectors, particularly in the last
five decades. Telecommunication, health, education, civil aviation, ports,
energy, construction and other sectors had a vital progress in terms of very
sophisticated agreements with multinational companies as contractors, and
by adopting very advanced technology. Family disputes were progressed in
In Egypt, see: Arbitration in Egypt in Abdul Hamid El Ahdab and Jalal El Ahdab
, Arbitration with the Arab Countries, (Kluwer Law International 2011) pp. 155 - 223
14

--- Page 4 ---
البحوث بالانجليزية
the Gulf region despite the fact that they are still depending on Sharia'a law.
Women's rights have progressed through decades and women now are fully
liberalized within the legal and religious context of Sharia'a law.
3- The social dimensions are almost the same in all Arab countries. The entire
Arab region, whether Copts or Muslims, have the same social and cultural
traditions. They are mainly Eastern conservative countries3. Cultural and
legal globalization have a considerable effect upon many legislation and other
branches of law in the MENA region, but do not influenced the eastern social
traditions which directly relates to culture. At the Kingdom of Bahrain, it
is clear that all sects are subject to courts which apply legal rules that are
mainly based on social traditions norms and social habits' influence, despite
the fact that each sect has its own applicable laws and own religious features.
The non- Muslims family law disputes are governed by ordinary civil courts
as stipulated by the Judicial Power Act no. 42 of 2002(article/ 6) and the
Code of Civil and Commercial Procedures no. 12 of 1971 at the Kingdom
of Bahrain (article 1). It is clear that the Bahrini legislative framework have
liberalized decades ago as it guarantees an easy access to judiciary in family
law disputes, not only to Muslim sects, but also to non-Muslims as the right
to start litigation is a constitutional right at the Kingdom of Bahrain (article
20/f of the Bahraini constitution). This is the sign of liberalization of the
Bahraini legislation. As a matter of fact, the cultural and legal globalization
and the flow of the legal culture as an intangible value, will influence
many areas of legislation, regulatory framework and contractual types.
This influence is not expected to extend to family laws of Muslims' sects,
in their family law governing rules, as they are influenced to a great extent
by social eastern conservative habits. The same vision is valid for Muslims
and Copts in Bahrain, Egypt and other Arab countries as both religions are
influenced by Arab social eastern conservative habits and consequently they
have common social habits in their family laws which are not subject to the
cultural and legal globalization flow.
Similarities which Characterize the Entire Region's Political and Legal
order
In brief, all Arab countries share the same culture with some minor liberal
Ismail, Mohamed A M, Globalization and New International Public Works Agreements
Public Hepnomis Law sd Ney oblanal Aminid tive ontracts, El Fatahr pubtishing.
Beirut, 2010.
Volume 6 - @anoniya
15

--- Page 5 ---
Harmonizing the CEDAW and Bahrini Legislation Constraints
'An International Perspective'
exceptions. The latter liberal trend was reflected in family laws. Those liberal
Arab countries were the first to develop family legislative tools in their
legislation in accordance with the international instruments. Conversely,
legal globalization will not influence family laws in Arab countries despite
the facts that it has considerably influenced women's rights.
The historical Ottoman Empire which characterized the Islamic Caliphate
in recent centuries reflected the Islamic Caliphate which existed in the Arab
world centuries before the Ottoman Empire. The latter Empire deteriorated
after World War I and the Arab world was divided into British and French
Colonies. Liberation revolutions, for instance, started in many Arab countries
and The Kingdom of Bahrain was liberalized in 1973.
There was consistency and harmony in the political, constitutional and legal
order in the region after the mid-20th century revolutions. The socialist
ideology was the leading ideology in Egypt, Syria, Libya and many Arab
countries in the late 1950s and early 1960s and for the following two decades.
This led to nationalization of private sectors' assets, unpredictability and
difficulties in various economic activities in the Arab world. The Gulf region
was far away from the socialist ideology and its dramatic possible effect on
some Arab countries' economy such as Egypt, Libya and Syria.
The Gulf States adopted the monarchy political pattern in light of the
families' social historical background
I. The International Instruments in the field of Human Rights
Protection: Women's Rights
During decades, the international community has recognized various
international instruments to achieve a high threshold of protection to
women's rights and to raise the level of awareness in many regions of the
world regarding equality between men and women and to implement human
rights' principles in women's rights. The most fundamental international
instruments are:
1) The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948):
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) is a milestone
document in the history of human rights. Drafted by representatives with
different legal and cultural backgrounds from all regions of the world, the
declaration was proclaimed by the United Nations General Assembly in Paris
on 10 December 1948 (General Assembly resolution 217 (III)), as a common
standard of achievements for all peoples and all nations. It sets out, for the
16

--- Page 6 ---
البحوث بالانجليزية
first time, fundamental human rights to be universally protected
The United Nations Charter reaffirmed faith in fundamental human rights,
and dignity and worth of the human person and committed all member
states to promote universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language,
or religion.
When the atrocities committed by the Nazi Germany became apparent after
the World War II, the consensus within the world community was that the
United Nations Charter did not sufficiently define the rights to which it
referred. A universal declaration that specified the rights of individuals was
necessary to give effect to the Charter's provisions on human rights.
The underlying structure of the UDHR was introduced in its second draft.
Articles 1 and 2 are the foundation blocks, with their principles of dignity,
liberty, equality and brotherhood. The articles from 3 to 11 constitute rights
of the individual such as the right of life and prohibits slavery.
2) The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights:
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) is a
multilateral treaty adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 16
December 1966, and in force from 23 March 1976. It commits its parties
to respect the civil and political rights of individuals, including the right to
life, freedom of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, electoral
rights and rights to due process and a fair trial. As of April 2014, the Covenant
has 74 signatories and 168 parties4.
The ICCPR is part of the International Bill of Human Rights, along
with the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (ICESCR) and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights(UDHR).
121
The ICCPR is monitored bythe United Nations Human Rights Committee (a
separate body to the United Nations Human Rights Council), which reviews
regular reports of States parties on how the rights are being implemented.
States must report initially one year after acceding to the Covenant and then
whenever the Committee requests (usually every four years). The Committee
normally meets in Geneva and normally holds three sessions per year5.
Visit: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/InternationalCovenant_on Civil and Political
Rights. Last accessed on 4th of August, 2016.
Visit: Visit: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Covenant_on_Civil_and
Political_Rights. Last accessed on 4'h of August, 2016.
Visit: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Covenant_on_Civil_and_Political_Rights. Last
Volume 6 - @anoniya 17

--- Page 7 ---
Harmonizing the CEDAW and Bahrini Legislation Constraints
'An International Perspective'
The ICCPR has its roots in the same process that led to the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. The States Parties to the present Covenant,
including those having responsibility for the administration of Non-Self-
Governing and Trust Territories, shall promote the realization of the right
of self-determination, and shall respect that right, in conformity with the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
Drafting continued on the convention, but there remained significant
differences between UN members on the relative importance of negative Civil
and Political versus positive Economic, Social and Cultural rights. These
eventually caused the convention to be split into two separate covenants, «one
to contain civil and political rights and the other to contain economic, social
and cultural rights."|5) The two covenants were to contain as many similar
provisions as possible, and be opened for signature simultaneously. Each
would also contain an article on the right of all people to self-determination6.
The first document became the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights and the second is the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights. The drafts were presented to the UN General Assembly
for discussion in 1954, and adopted in 1966. As a result of diplomatic
negotiations, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights was adopted shortly before the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights.
The Covenant follows the structure of the UDHR and, with a preamble and
fifty-three articles, divided into six parts:
Part 1 (Article 1)
recognizes the right of all peoples to self-determination, including the
right to "freely determine their political status", pursue their economic,
social and cultural goals, and manage and dispose of their own resources.
It recognizes a negative right of a people not to be deprived of its means of
subsistence, and imposes an obligation on those parties still responsible for
non-self-governing and trust territories (colonies) to encourage and respect
their self-determination.
accessed on 4th of August, 2016.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Covenant_on_Civil_and_Political_
Rights. Last accessed on 4'h of August, 2016.
18

--- Page 8 ---
البحوث بالانجليزية
Part 2 (Articles 2 - 5)
obliges parties to legislate where necessary to give effect to the rights
recognized in the Covenant, and to provide an effective legal remedy for
any violation of those rights. It also requires the rights be recognized
«without distinction of any kind, such as race, color, sex, language, religion,
political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other
status,» and to ensure that they are enjoyed equally by women. The rights
can only be limited «in time of public emergency which threatens the life
of the nation, » and even then no derogation is permitted from the rights to
life, freedom from torture and slavery, the freedom from retrospective law,
the right to personhood, and freedom of thought, conscience and religion.
Part 3 (Articles 6 - 27)
lists the rights themselves. These include rights to
physical integrity, in the form of the right to life and freedom from torture
and slavery (Articles 6, 7, and 8);
liberty and security of the person, in the form of freedom from arbitrary
arrest and detention (Articles 9 - 11);
procedural fairness in law, in the form of rights to due process, a fair and
impartial trial, the presumption of innocence, and recognition as a person
before the law (Articles 14, 15, and 16);
individual liberty, in the form of the freedoms of movement, thought,
conscience and religion, speech, association and assembly, family rights, the
right to a nationality, and the right to privacy (Articles 12, 13, 17 - 24);
prohibition of any propaganda for war as well as any advocacy of national or
religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or
violence by law (Article 20);
political participation, including the right to vote (Article 25);
Non-discrimination, minority rights and equality before the law (Articles 26
and 27)
Many of these rights include specific actions which must be undertaken to
realize them.
Part 4 (Articles 28 - 45)
governs the establishment and operation of the Human Rights
Committee and the reporting and monitoring of the Covenant. It also allows
parties to recognize the competence of the Committee to resolve disputes
between parties on the implementation of the Covenant (Articles 41 and 42).
Volume 6 - @anoniya
19

--- Page 9 ---
Harmonizing the CEDAW and Bahrini Legislation Constraints
'An International Perspective'
Part 5 (Articles 46 - 47)
clarifies that the Covenant shall not be interpreted as interfering with the
operation of the United Nations or «the inherent right of all peoples to enjoy
and utilize fully and freely their natural wealth and resources».
Part 6 (Articles 48 - 53)
governs ratification, entry into force, and amendment of the Covenant.
The Kingdom of Bahrain ratified the ICCPR by law no. 56 of 2006. The
ICCPR became part of the Bahraini legislation since ratification in 12th of
August, 2006.
3) The International Covenant of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights:
The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (ICESCR) is a multilateral treaty adopted by the United Nations
General Assembly on 16 December 1966, and in force from 3 January
1976. It commits its parties to work toward the granting of economic, social,
and cultural rights to the Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories and
individuals, including labor rights and the right to health, the right to
education, and the right to an adequate standard of living. As of 2015, the
Covenant has 164 parties. A further six countries, including the United
States, have signed but not ratified the Covenant. The ICESCR is part of
the International Bill of Human Rights, along with the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights (UDHR) and the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR), including the latter›s first and second Optional
Protocols7.
The Covenant is monitored by the UN Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights. [5]
Right to bealth
Article 12 of the Covenant recognizes the right of everyone to ‹ the enjoyment
of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health›. ‹Health› is
understood not just as a right to be healthy, but as a right to control one›s
own health and body (including reproduction), and be free from interference
such as torture or medical experimentation. States must protect this right by
ensuring that everyone within their jurisdiction has access to the underlying
determinants of health, such as clean water, sanitation, food, nutrition
and housing, and through a comprehensive system of healthcare, which is
Visit: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Covenant_on_Economic,_Social_and_
Cultural_Rights. Last accessed on 4h of August, 2016.
20

--- Page 10 ---
البحوث بالانجليزية
available to everyone without discrimination, and economically accessible
to all. Article 12.2 requires parties to take specific steps to improve the
health of their citizens, including reducing infant mortality and improving
child health, improving environmental and workplace health, preventing,
controlling and treating epidemic diseases, and creating conditions to ensure
equal and timely access to medical services for all. These are considered to be
'illustrative, non-exhaustive examples', rather than a complete statement of
parties' obligations.
The right to health is interpreted
as requiring parties to respect
women's' reproductive rights, by not limiting access to contraception or
‹censoring, withholding or intentionally misrepresenting› information
about sexual health. They must also ensure that women are protected from
harmful traditional practices such as female genital mutilation.
Right to health is inclusive right extending not only to timely and appropriate
health care but also to the underlying determinants of health, such as access
to safe and potable water and adequate sanitation, an adequate supply of
safe food, nutrition and housing, healthy occupational and environmental
conditions8.
It is worth mentioning that Egypt accepted the Covenant to the extent it
does not conflict with Islamic Sharia'a law. Sharia is 'The primary source of
legislation' pursuant to Article 2 of both the previous 1971 Constitution and
Article 2 of the current 2014 constitution.
The Kingdom of Bahrain ratified the ICESCR by law no. 10 of 2007. The
ICESCR became part of the Bahraini legislation since ratification in 16th of
July, 2007.
4) The United Nations Convention of Elimination of All Kinds of
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW):
The United Nations Convention of Elimination of All Kinds of Discrimination
Against Women (CEDAW), adopted in 1979 by the UN General Assembly, is
often described as an international bill of rights for women. Consisting of a
preamble and 30 articles, it defines what constitutes discrimination against
women and sets up an agenda for national action to end such discrimination.
The Convention defines discrimination against women as '...any distinction,
exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the effect or
purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise
Visit: Visit: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Covenant_on Economic,
Social_and_Cultural_Rights. Last accessed on 4'h of August, 2016.
Volume 6 - @anoniya 21

--- Page 11 ---
Harmonizing the CEDAW and Bahrini Legislation Constraints
'An International Perspective'
by women, irrespective of their marital status, on a basis of equality of men
and women, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political,
economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field›.
By accepting the Convention, States commit themselves to undertake a series
of measures to end discrimination against women in all forms, including:
to incorporate the principle of equality of men and women in their
legal systems, abolish all discriminatory laws and adopt appropriate new
modified ones prohibiting discrimination against women;
to establish tribunals and other public institutions to ensure the
effective protection of women against discrimination; and
to ensure elimination of all acts of discrimination against women by
persons, organizations or enterprises.
The Convention provides the basis for realizing equality between women and
men through ensuring women's equal access to, and equal opportunities in,
political and public life, including the right to vote and to stand for election,
as well as education, health and employment. States' parties agree to take
all appropriate measures, including legislation and temporary special
measures, so that women can enjoy all their human rights and fundamental
freedoms9.
The Convention is the only human rights treaty which affirms the
reproductive rights of women and targets culture and tradition as influential
forces shaping gender roles and family relations. It affirms women's rights
to acquire, change or retain their nationality and the nationality of their
children. States parties also agree to take appropriate measures against all
forms of traffic in women and exploitation of women. Countries that have
ratified or acceded to the Convention are legally bound to put its provisions
into practice. They are also committed to submit national reports, at least
every four years, on measures they have taken to comply with their treaty
obligations 10.
The Kingdom of Bahrain ratified CEDAW by Decree-law no 5 of 2002. The
CEDAW is a part of the Bahraini legislation since ratification.
9
10
Visit: http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/. Last accessed on 4th of August 2016.
Visit: http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/. Last accessedon 4thof August 2016.
22

--- Page 12 ---
البحوث بالانجليزية
5) The CEDAW from Ratification to Implementation: An International
Perspective:
The CEDAW had several steps from ratification to implementation as
follows:
Ratification:
The Kingdom of Bahrain made reservations with respect to the following
provisions of the Convention11:
- Article 2, in order to ensure its implementation within the bounds of the
provisions of the Islamic Shariah;
- Article 9, paragraph 2;
- Article 15, paragraph 4;
- Article 16, in so far as it is incompatible with the provisions of the Islamic
Shariah;
- Article 29, paragraph 1.
Decree-Law no (5) of 2002 at the Kingdom of Bahrain stipulated the
abovementioned reservations which were made by the Kingdom of Bahrain.
The CEDAW was ratified by the same decree-law and since the promulgation
of this decree-law the CEDAW is a valid reservation at the Kingdom of
Bahrain.
It is appropriate to refer that on 25th of April 2003, and with regard to
reservations made by Bahrain upon accession12, The Government of the
Republic of France has examined the reservations made by the Government
of the Kingdom of Bahrain upon accession to the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women of 18 December
1979. The Government of the Republic of France considers that, by making
the implementation of articles 2 and 16 of the Convention subject to respect
for the Islamic Shariah, the Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain is
making two reservations of such a general and indeterminate scope that it is
not possible to ascertain which changes to obligations under the Convention
they are intended to introduce. Consequently, the Government of France
considers that the reservations as formulated could make the provisions of
the Convention completely ineffective. For these reasons, the Government
objects to the reservations made in respect of articles 2 and 16 of the
Visit: http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/reservations-country.htm. Last
accessed 7th of August, 2016.
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/reservations-country.htm. Last accessed on
7th of August, 2016.
Volume 6 - @anoniya 23

--- Page 13 ---
Harmonizing the CEDAW and Bahrini Legislation Constraints
'An International Perspective'
Convention, which it considers to be reservations likely to be incompatible
with the object and purpose of the Convention.
The Government of France objects to the reservations made in respect of
article 9, paragraph 2, and article 15, paragraph 4, of the Convention.
The Government of France notes that these objections shall not preclude
the entry into force of the Convention on the Elimination of AIl Forms of
Discrimination against Women between Bahrain and France.
It is appropriate to refer to the fact that on the 28 February 2003 and with
regard to the reservation made by Bahrain upon accession:
"The Government of Denmark has examined the reservations made by
the Government of Bahrain upon accession to the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women regarding article
2, paragraph 2 of article 9, and paragraph 4 of article 15 and article 16.
The Government of Denmark finds that the reservation to articles 2 and 16
with reference to the provisions of Islamic Sharia is of unlimited scope and
undefined character. Consequently, the Government of Denmark considers
the said reservations as being incompatible with the object and purpose
of the Convention and accordingly inadmissible and without effect under
international law.
The Government of Denmark furthermore notes that the reservations to
paragraph 2 of article 9 and to paragraph 4 of article 15 of the Convention
seek to exclude an obligation of non-discrimination, which is the aim of
the Convention. The Government of Denmark finds that these reservations
made by the Government of Bahrain are not in conformity with the object
and purpose of the Convention.
The Government of Denmark therefore objects to the aforementioned
reservations made by the Government of Bahrain to the Convention on
the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women. This
shall not preclude the entry into force of the Convention in its entirety
between Bahrain and Denmark.
The Government of Denmark recommends the Government of Bahrain
to reconsider its reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women."
Some other European countries expressed the same concerns such as
Netherlands, Sweden, the Federal Republic of Germany and other countries.
24

--- Page 14 ---
البحوث بالانجليزية
It is appropriate to refer at this stage to the fact that Egypt has ratified the
CEDAW with similar reservations as follows 13:
Reservations made upon signature and confirmed upon ratification:
In respect of article 9
Reservation to the text of article 9, paragraph 2, concerning the granting
to women of equal rights with men with respect to the nationality of their
children, without prejudice to the acquisition by a child born of a marriage
of the nationality of his father. This is in order to prevent a child's acquisition
of two nationalities where his parents are of different nationalities, since
this may be prejudicial to his future. It is clear that the child's acquisition
of his father's nationality is the procedure most suitable for the child and
that this does not infringe upon the principle of equality between men and
women, since it is customary for a woman to agree, upon marrying an alien,
that her children shall be of the father's nationality.
In respect of article 16
Reservation to the text of article 16 concerning the equality of men and women
in all matters relating to marriage and family relations during the marriage
and upon its dissolution, without prejudice to the Islamic Sharia's provisions
whereby women are accorded rights equivalent to those of their spouses
so as to ensure a just balance between them. This is out of respect for the
sacrosanct nature of the firm religious beliefs which govern marital relations
in Egypt and which may not be called in question and in view of the fact
that one of the most important bases of these relations is an equivalency
of rights and duties so as to ensure complementary which guarantees true
equality between the spouses. The provisions of the Sharia lay down that
the husband shall pay bridal money to the wife and maintain her fully and
shall also make a payment to her upon divorce, whereas the wife retains
full rights over her property and is not obliged to spend anything on her
keep. The Sharia therefore restricts the wife's rights to divorce by making it
contingent on a judge›s ruling, whereas no such restriction is laid down in
the case of the husband.
Visit: http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/reservations-country.htm.Last
accessed 7th of August, 2016.
Volume 6 - @anoniya 25

--- Page 15 ---
Harmonizing the CEDAW and Bahrini Legislation Constraints
'An International Perspective'
In respect of article 29:
The Egyptian delegation also maintains the reservation contained in article
29, paragraph 2, concerning the right of a State signatory to the Convention
to declare that it does not consider itself bound by paragraph 1 of that
article concerning the submission to an arbitral body of any dispute which
may arise between States concerning the interpretation or application of
the Convention. This is in order to avoid being bound by the system of
arbitration in this field.
Reservation made upon ratification:
General reservation on article 2
The Arab Republic of Egypt is willing to comply with the content of
this article, provided that such compliance does not run counter to the
Islamic Sharia.
It is worth mentioning that the Republic of France had also some reservations
in the light of the French social patterns and legal infrastructure as follows28:
Upon signature:
The Government of the French Republic declares that article 9 of the
Convention must not be interpreted as precluding the application of the
second paragraph of article 96 of the code of French nationality14.
[All other declarations and reservations were confirmed in substance upon
ratification.J
Upon ratification:
Declarations:
The Government of the French Republic declares that the preamble to
the Convention in particular the eleventh preambular paragraph contains
debatable elements which are definitely out of place in this text.
The Government of the French Republic declares that the term "family
education" in article 5 (b) of the Convention must be interpreted as meaning
public education concerning the family and that, in any event, article 5 will
be applied subject to respect for article 17 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and article 8 of the European Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
The Government of the French Republic declares that no provision of the
Convention must be interpreted as prevailing over provisions of French
legislation which are more favorable to women than to men.
Reservations:
Visit: http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/reservations-country.htm.
accessed 7hh of August, 2016.
26

--- Page 16 ---
البحوث بالانجليزية
Article 14
1. The Government of the French Republic declares that article 14,
Paragraph 2 (c), should be interpreted as guaranteeing that women who
fulfil the conditions relating to family or employment required by French
legislation for personal participation shall acquire their own rights within
the framework of social security.
2. The Government of the French Republic declares that article 14, paragraph
2 (h), of the Convention should not be interpreted as implying the actual
provision, free of charge, of the services mentioned in that paragraph.
Article 16 1 (g)
The Government of the French Republic enters a reservation concerning the
right to choose a family name mentioned in article 16, Paragraph 1 (g), of
the Convention.
Article 29
The Government of the French Republic declares, in pursuance of article 29,
Paragraph 2, of the Convention, that it will not be bound by the provisions
of article 29, paragraph 1.
It is clear from the abovementioned facts that the French Republic made
several reservations which are compatible with the French community social
patterns and French civil legal culture.
The Kingdom of Bahrain has ratified the CEDAW by Decree-law no. 5 of
.2002
Implementation:
Pursuant to article 2 of the Decree-law no.70 of 2014, the Kingdom of
Bahrain has reservations only to article 9/2 and 29/1 from the CEDAW. The
Kingdom of Bahrain relinquished all other reservations to the Convention.
In fact, the new Decree-law in 2014 has fine-tuned the previous reservations
which were made by the Kingdom of Bahrain in 2002 upon the ratification
of the Convention.
This article will refer on a later stage to the reservations made by the Decree-
law no. 70 of 2014 and which are currently part of the Bahrini legislation.
volume 6 - Danoniya 27

--- Page 17 ---
Harmonizing the CEDAW and Bahrini Legislation Constraints
'An International Perspective'
6) The Regional Instruments in the Arab Countries:
The Arab Charter for Human Rights, 2004
On the 23rd of May, 2004 the sixteenth Arab Summit in Tunisia approved
the Arab Charter for Human Rights. The charter sets out the main legislative
framework for the core rights protection for women, in addition to other
human rights which need protection in Arab countries.
Among many rights which the Charter maintains to Arab citizens, The
Charter clarifies the core rights for women in addition to many other
women's rights which the charter emphasizes. A clear example is Article 3/3
of the Charter stipulates that 'men and women are equal in human dignity,
in rights and duties, in the light of positive discrimination which the Islamic
Sharia'a, other religions, legislation and valid charters have approved, in
favor of women. Each state party undertakes all precautions to secure equal
opportunities and practical equality between men and women in enjoying
all rights stipulated in this charter. Article 33/1 stipulated that 'Family is the
natural and basic unit for the society. Marriage between a man and a woman
is the base to start a family. The man and the woman, since they are adults,
have the right to marry and establish a family pursuant to marriage contract
stipulations. Marriage is not held unless there is a complete consent from
parties without any duress. [.].'
Article 33/2 pointed out that state and community guarantee protection for
the family and its support, protection of its members and the prohibition
of all kinds of violence and bad treatment between its members, particularly
woman and child. They also guarantee for maternity, childhood, and disabled,
protection and care which are necessary. They also guarantee for kids and
youth the greatest opportunities for body and mental developments.
Article 34/1 stipulates that work is normal right for each citizen and states
guarantee work opportunity as possible to people without any discrimination
based on sex or any other reason. Article 34/4 prohibits any discrimination
between man and women on the rights of getting an advantage from
training, operation, protection of labor, and wages when the value and kind
of work are equal.
Article 41 stipulates that states party to this charter, in all fields, should take
all appropriate measures to achieve partnership between man and women to
achieve national development goals.
The kingdom of Bahrain has ratified the Charter pursuant to law no. 7 of
2006. The Charter is part of the Bahrini legislation since ratification.
28

--- Page 18 ---
البحوث بالانجليزية
II) The CEDAW's Value Added to the Coexisting and Overlapping
International, Regional and Domestic Equality and non-discrimination
Regime: The Actual Value Added of the CEDAW: Socio-economic Rights
as the Kingdom of Bahrain is a Democratic Welfare State.
The CEDAW's Value Added to the coexisting and overlapping international,
regional and domestic equality and non-discrimination regime is remarkable.
It is of a fundamental importance to refer to the fact that CEDAW has
great effect to the socio-economic rights of women. 'Human development
if not engendered, is endangered' 15. This was a verdict of the Gender
Development, the 1995 Human development Report devoted to gender.
The crucial question is 'can the CEDAW make a unique contribution to
international human rights law by engendering human rights? "Most of the
human rights instruments contain a provision to prohibit discrimination
between sexes and there is an implicit assumption that rights are given, and
should simply be extended to women. But, it is argued here, this does little
to address the gendered nature of social institutions and structures. Instead,
human rights should be 'engendered' or infused with substantive gender
equality. The CEDAW, by contrast, through its express focus on women,
goes a long way towards engendering human rights. What does the concept
of 'engendering socio-economic rights' entail? Some scholars point out that
it is necessary to recognize the distinctive nature of women's experience of
Poverty and disadvantages.
This vision suggests that it is not sufficient simply to extend human rights
to women. Instead, rights need to be recast in the light of the demands
of substantive gender equality. Substantive equality goes beyond treating
women in the same way as men and requires transformative measures 16.
This entails re-conceptualizing the rights themselves.
i) Substantive Equality:
It is not sufficient simply to extend rights to women. If the gender-specific
factors causing women's disadvantage are fully to be addressed, rights must
be infused with substantive gender equality. What would this entail?
Formal equality assumes that the aim is to treat everyone in their merits,
15
United Nations Development Program (UNDP), Gender Development (Oxford
University Press, 1995) at 1, available at: http:// hdr.undp.org/en/reports/global/hdr1995/
chapter (last accessed 8 February 2013).
16
Anne Hellum and Henriette Sinding Aasen, Women›s Human Rights, CEDAW in
International, Regional, and national Law, Cambridge University Press, 2013, Part II Actual
added value of the CEDAW.
Volume 6 - @anoniya 29

--- Page 19 ---
Harmonizing the CEDAW and Bahrini Legislation Constraints
'An International Perspective'
regardless of their gender. But treating gender as irrelevant merely ignores
the ongoing disadvantage experienced by women. The result is to entrench
disadvantage. For example, simply extending the right to social security
to women on equal terms with men ignores the fact that women have
interrupted work patterns and are often engaged in informal work. Equality
might demand, not identical treatment, but very different treatment. Equal
consideration for all may demand very unequal treatment in favor of the
disadvantages 17.
Formal equality is a relative concept as it requires that two similarly situated
individuals be treated alike. This means that there is no difference in
principle between treating men and women equally badly and treating them
equally well. Equality is not substitute for substantive rights. For instance,
if women's rights to equal pay is based on the pay of men in a very low-
paid occupation, equality holds out little promise. Substantive rights to
minimum wages are far more valuable. Moreover, because formal equality
is agnostic as to the substantive outcome, it can be fulfilled by removing
benefits from men rather than extending benefits to women. The result is
that women are worse off and men are not better off.
Substantive equality moves beyond the need for a male norm. It requires
some social institutions to change. Secondly, substantive equality takes
into account existing power structures and the role of gender within them.
Far from being irrelevant, gender may be highly relevant in addressing
inequalities in society. Thus, substantive equality does not simply aim to
equal treatment. Equal treatment sometimes leads to disadvantage for
women, therefore, it may be necessary to treat women differently in order
to achieve equalities of the outcome. Substantive equality is not neutral as
to the outcome. It is substantive in the sense that it advances individuals,
rather than formal in ensuring only consistency. Substantive equality might
entail in the context of gender, and in particular in relation to engendering
socio-economic rights.
It is argued y some scholars that the substantive equality should be regarded
as having four different dimensions: the redistributive dimension: the
substantive equality concentrates on remedying disadvantage, rather than
achieving gender neutrality. Disadvantage is both material and social.
Gender-based disadvantage includes the lack of empowerment of women
Anne Hellum and Henriette Sinding Aasen, Women›s Human Rights, CEDAW in
International, Regional, and national Law, Cambridge University Press, 2013, Part II Actual
added value of the CEDAW.
30

--- Page 20 ---
البحوث بالانجليزية
within the context of family and social relations. Thus substantive equality
aims to redress disadvantage in its specihcally gendered context, including
women's subordinate positions in the family and reproduction, in the paid
workforce and in other relationships of power. This means that affirmative
action measures in favor of women do not breach the principle of equality as
long as their aim is to redress discriminatory disadvantage 18.
The recognition dimension is
a matter of respect and dignity. Dignity
as a matter of substantive equality means that, as well as socio-economic
disadvantage and distributive wrongs, account is taken of what is called
'recognition'' wrongs. 'Recognition'' wrongs consist in 'misrecognition'
or inequality in the mutual respect and concerns that people fell for one
another in society. This dimension of substantive inequality includes, in
Particular, humiliation and violence on grounds of gender. Such wrongs
can be experienced regardless of relative socio-economic disadvantage.
Therefore, it is important to recognize the need for respect, recognition and
dignity as a separate element of substantive equality19.
The transformative dimension of substantive equality is the way it deals
with difference. The problem is not so much difference per se, but the
detriment that is attached to difference. Substantive equality should aim
to respect and accommodate difference, removing the detriment but not
the difference itself. Thus, instead of requiring the women to conform the
male norms, substantive equality requires transformation of existing male-
oriented institutions and social structures.
The participative dimension is the final dimension of the substantive
equality and it means the importance it attaches to women's agency and
voice. Substantive equality requires decision-makers to hear and respond to
the voice of women, rather than imposing top-down decisions.
Engendering Socio-economic rights: Substantive equality requires a
transformation of the right itself. Constraints of freedom include not just
political interference, but also socio-economic and personal circumstances:
what people can achieve is influenced by economic opportunities, political
Anne Hellum and Henriette Sinding Aasen, Women›s Human Rights, CEDAW in
International, Regional, and national Law, Cambridge University Press, 2013, Part II Actual
added value of the CEDAW.
Volume 6 - @anoniya 31

--- Page 21 ---
Harmonizing the CEDAW and Bahrini Legislation Constraints
'An International Perspective'
liberties, social powers and the enabling conditions of the good health and
basic education.
This means that for human rights to be meaningful, the state must take
positive steps to remove barriers and facilitate the exercise of such rights.
ii) International Instruments and the Gender Equality:
The gender equality is considered as an 'add-on' the existing rights within
the ICESCR. The ICESCR includes Article 3, which states ' The state parties
to the present covenant undertake to ensure the equal right of men and
women to the enjoyment of all economic, social and cultural rights set forth
in the present covenant'. Equality can enhance socio-economic rights as
'add-on'. The committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR)
puts it in the General Comment on Non-Discrimination issues on 2009:
'discrimination undermines the fulfillment of economic, social and cultural
rights for a significant proportion of the world's population 20. Equality
can be powerful partner to socio-economic rights. The equal right of men
and women to the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights is a
mandatory and immediate obligation of states parties. Equality is regarded as
simply extending rights in the ICESCR to women. The travaux préparatoires
state that Article 3 was included in the covenant to indicate that 'the same
rights should be expressly recognized for men and women on an equal
footing'. At the same time, they refer to the need for 'suitable measures to be
taken to ensure that women had the opportunity to exercise their rights. 21
The CESCR claims that it has taken notes for factors negatively affecting the
equal right of men and women to the enjoyment of socio-economic rights in
many of its general comments, including the right to adequate housing, the
right to adequate food, the right to education and the right to the highest
attainable standard of health. The CESCR has produced a comment on
equality for women which makes it clear that equality should be understood
in a substantive way that goes beyond gender neutrality. Formal equality
assumes that equality is achieved if a law or policy treats men and women in
a neutral manner. Substantive equality is concerned, in addition, with the
Ine Hellum and Henriette Sinding Aasen, Women›s Human Rights, CEDAW
ternational, Keg1onal, and natonal Law, Cambridge Unversity Fress, 2013, Fart Il ActL
added value of the CEDAW.
21
nne Hellum and Henriette Sinding Aasen, Women›s Human Rights, CEDAW /
ternational, Regional, and national Law, Cambridge University Press, 2013, Part Il Actua
added value of the CEDAW.
32

--- Page 22 ---
البحوث بالانجليزية
effect of laws, policies and practices.
The covenant was clear in respect of Article 6(1), the right to work and Article
7, the right to just and favorable conditions of work. According to the general
comment, implementing Article 3 in relation to Article 6 of the Covenant
requires, inter alia, that, in law and in practice, men and women have equal
access to jobs at all levels and occupations and that vocational training and
guidance programmers, in both the public and private sectors, provide men
and women with the skills, information and knowledge necessary for them
to benefit equally from the right to work. It is true that the ICESCR also
protects the women's substantive rights to dignity.
The CEDAW differs from the ICESCR in that it regards gender equality
and socio-economic rights as interdependent, recognizing that gender
inequality must be addressed at least in part by providing justiciable socio-
economic rights. However, on closer inspection it can be seen that the CEDAW
highlights two approaches. Part of the CEDAW, and its interpretation in
later General Recommendation, go beyond simply extending given rights to
women, and instead reframes the rights themselves in the light of substantive
equality. However, other parts of the CEDAW simply extend given socio-
economic rights to Women.
III) The CEDAW at the Kingdom of Bahrain's National Legislation?
Challenges and Prospects
The Kingdom of Bahrain had a reservation to article 2 of the CEDAW
convention22, to assure that its application is in accordance with the rules
of Sharia'a law. The Sharia'a law is a main source of legislation as per the
stipulation of article 2 of the constitution of the Kingdom of Bahrain. The
CEDAW is a valid legislation at the Kingdom of Bahrain and it is below the
constitution in the hierarchy of the applicable legal rules within the legal
system of the Kingdom of Bahrain. The scope of reservation is extended only
to some family rights such as custodianship, guardianship, and inheritance.
The constitution and the legislation contained other women's rights such as
the rights of equal opportunity, the right of work, the right of equal wages,
the right to participate on public life, and etc.
22
Article 2 of Decree-law no. 5 of 2002. Decree-law no. 70 of 2014 which annulled article
2 of the Decree-law no. 5 of 2002. The Decree-law which was promulgated on 2014 stipulates
that Che Kingdom of Babrain has reservations on article 9 paragraph 2, and article 29 paragraph
Volume 6 - @anoniya 33

--- Page 23 ---
Harmonizing the CEDAW and Bahrini Legislation Constraints
'An International Perspective'
It is worth stating that the Sharia'a law while codifying inheritance rules
stipulates that men has double rights of women in only some restricted cases
as the substantive application in inherence rules in Sahria'a rules stipulates
favorable financial treatment to women in most financial cases23. The latter
conclusion confirms the approach of Sharia'a law to protect women's socio-
economic rights.
Pursuant to article 2 of the Decree-law no.70 of 2014, the Kingdom of
Bahrain has reservations only to article 9/2 and 29/1 from the CEDAW. The
Kingdom of Bahrain relinquished all other reservations to the Convention.
In fact, the new Decree-law in 2014 has fine-tuned the previous reservations
which were made by the Kingdom of Bahrain in 2002 upon the ratification
of the Convention.
The reservation to Article 9/2:
The Kingdom of Bahrain made a reservation to article 9/2 of the convention
which stipulates that member states grant women equal rights to men
regarding the nationality of children. The reason of this reservation is
that the Bahrini nationality requirements is organized by the Nationality
law which was promulgated in 1963 and its amendments. Article 4 of this
legislation, was amended by Decree-law no. 12 of 1989, and stipulates that
any person can be Bahrini if: a) he was born in Bahrain or outside and his
father was Bahrini when he was born. A person can be Bahrini if he was
born in Bahrain, his father was born in Bahrain and he stayed in Bahrain
as a permanent residence. This is conditioned that his father does not hold
another nationality. T'he same legislative policy was adopted by many other
legislation such as Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, UAE, Jordan and Syria. A
Bahraini mother if married to a non-Bahrini cannot grant Bahrini nationality
to her child. The Bahrini legislature aims to avoid dual nationality to
children if the legislation grants Bahraini nationality to the child form both
parents. A child may get the foreign nationality of his father in addition to
the Bahrini nationality.
It is of fundamental importance to refer to the fact that article 4 of the
abovementioned nationality law stipulates that: A person can be Bahraini if
he was born in Bahrain or outside and his mother was Bahrini when born, if
he has no known father or his ancestry to his father was not legally proven.
The United Nations, The Committee concerned with elimination of discrimination
against women, Reports submitted from member states pursuant to article 18 from the
Convention of Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women. The regular first and
second report for member states, Bahrain, pages 75-6.
34

--- Page 24 ---
البحوث بالانجليزية
The latter legislative provision is the sign of development and compatibility
of Bahrini legislation with international human rights law.
The reservation to Article 29/1:
The Kingdom of Bahrain made a reservation to article 29 of the Convention
which stipulates that arbitration is the mechanism of disputes' settlements
if any disputes arises between members party to the Convention.
The Kingdom of Bahrain made this reservation for many reasons: Firstly
sub-clause (2) of article 29 of the Convention grants any state, which is a
party to the Convention, the right not to oblige with sub-clause (1) of article
.29
Secondly, the Kingdom of Bahrain do not prefer to be involved in any
international dispute before assuring that the practice in applying the
Convention provisions at the Kingdom of Bahrain is successful. This will
be maintained through promoting the right legislative and regulatory
frameworks to apply the Convention to the Bahrini community. The
Kingdom of Bahrain would like to assure the compatibility of its legislation
and regulatory framework with the Convention. The latter vision assures
that the Kingdom of Bahrain is serious to apply the Convention as it respects
the aims and goals of the Convention.
Thirdly, The Kingdom of Bahrain may withdraw this reservation in the
right time pursuant to sub-clause (3) of article 29 24.
IV) The Interplay between the CEDAW and the Domestic Legal Regime
at the Kingdom of Bahrain: The Implementation and Domestication of
the CEDAW at the Kingdom of Bahrain:
Women's Rights; the Legal framework at the Kingdom of Bahrain
1) Constitutional Framework:
The constitution of the Kingdom of Bahrain stipulates in article 1.h that:
'Citizens men and women have the right to participate in public affairs and
enjoy political rights, among those rights is the right to vote and the right
of candidacy, pursuant to this constitution and in the light of legislative
stipulations explained in legislation. Any of the citizens cannot be deprived
24
The United Nations, The Committee concerned with elimination of discrimination
against women, Reports submitted from member states pursuant to article 18 from the
Convention of Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women. The regular first and
second report for member states, Bahrain, pages 164-65.
Volume 6 - @anoniya 35

--- Page 25 ---
Harmonizing the CEDAW and Bahrini Legislation Constraints
'An International Perspective'
from the right to vote or the right of candidacy unless for reasons stipulated
pursuant to law.
Article 5.a from the constitution of the Kingdom of Bahrain stipulates that:
'Family is the base of society, based on religion, morals, and love of the nation.
Law maintains its legitimate existence, and enforces its ties and values, and
protects maternity and childhood, and take care of children
Article 5.b stipulates that:
'State maintains coordination between woman duties towards her family
and her work in the society and maintains her equality with men in political,
social, cultural, economic life without violation to Sharia'a law stipulations'.
Article 18 stipulates that equality between people is a constitutional principle
as follows:
'People are equal in human dignity, and citizens are equal before law in rights
and public duties, no discrimination between them on this regard because
of sex, origin, language, religion, beliefs'.
In conclusion, the constitutional framework at the Kingdom of Bahrain
is unique in maintaining protection of women's rights in various aspects.
Further, it is clear that socio-economic rights of women were existing at
the Kingdom of Bahrain's constitution long time ago and even before the
ratification of the CEDAW in 2002.
2) Legislative and regulatory framework
The Bahrini legislature has developed various legislation since 1956
concerning women's rights. For instance, in 1957 the Governor of Bahrain
Shiekh Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa promulgated the declaration no.
10 of 1957 which permitted women working at the government and who
work as doctors or nurses to drive cars. This declaration was unique as it
grants the right to drive cars to women in Bahrain as the first country in
the Gulf countries to grant this right to women. It is estimated that about
169 legislative and administrative tools have been promulgated and issued
to procure and maintain women's right implementation at the Kingdom
of Bahrain since 1956 and until present. Among many administrative tools
is the decree issued by his highness the Prince of Bahrain no. 44 of 2011
to establish the Supreme Council of Women. Article one of this decree
stipulates that the Supreme Council of Women shall be established and it
has the juristic entity. The article further adds that the Council is considered
the authority in Bahrain for all issues concerning women. Article two
pointed out that the Council is headed by Her Highness Princess Sabika bint
36

--- Page 26 ---
البحوث بالانجليزية
Ibrahim Al Khalifa and the members of the Council should be 14 members.
Article three stipulates that the Council is concerned, among many issues,
with the proposing of the public policy in the field of development of
women in the society's constitutional and civil institutions. The Council is
also concerned with how to enable women to carry out its role in public life
and the integration of women's efforts in developments' programs with the
guarantee of non-discrimination against women. Further, and among many
issues, the Council is concerned with drawing upa national plan for the
development of women and solving their problems in various felds.
The 1957 declaration and other legislative and administrative tools since this
date and until present reflect the governmental policies in the Kingdom of
Bahrain which aim to procure and maintain a high threshold of protection
to the socio-economic rights of women. In addition, those polices are
compatible with the international instruments and international practice.
V) Conclusions:
1- It is monitored that there is a considerable progress in Women's rights
in the Kingdom of Bahrain on the legislative side on one hand, and on
the regulatory framework and polices on the other hand. The Kingdom of
Bahrain has ratified the CEDAW with very minor reservations, stipulated in
2014, in order to increase the threshold of Protection to women's human
rights in Bahrain, and to enable the juristic entities which are responsible
for women's rights' protection to exercise more positive and constructive
roles in women's rights protection. Bahrain's target behind the CEDAW's
ratification is to respect the state's international undertakings on the
international community regarding women's rights protection.
2- The CEDAW from ratification to implementation is a considerable step
in women's human rights in the Kingdom of Bahrain and in other Arab
countries in the MENA region. It is true that on the date the Kingdom of
Bahrain has ratified the CEDAW there was a significant improvements in
women's legislation and on the regulatory framework as well as polices at
the Kingdom of Bahrain. The CEDAW was an international instrument to
assure the existing legislative and regulatory situation in the Kingdom of
Bahrain in favor of women's rights since 1956 and until present.
3- The main reason behind social objections against CEDAW at the
Kingdom of Bahrain is the lack of information regarding the substance
of the international convention. The substantive rules of the convention
and the reservations which the Kingdom of Bahrain had undertaken upon
Volume 6 - @anoniya 37

--- Page 27 ---
Harmonizing the CEDAW and Bahrini Legislation Constraints
'An International Perspective'
ratification and minimized in 2014 to maintain compatibility with Sharia'a
law, are not well explained to the public, and in particular the religious forces
at the Kingdom.
4- The roles of the media and press are pivotal on this context as they enable
think tanks to explain to the public the advantages of the substantive rules of
the CEDAW and how is the reservation made by the Kingdom of Bahrain is
a fundamental safeguard to protect the public interest, the Islamic and Arab
identity of the Kingdom of Bahrain, eastern conservative characteristics of
the Bahraini society, and the public policy and morals constraints of the
Bahraini Arab society.
5- The kingdom of Bahrain's reservations regarding some articles of the
CEDAW and the stipulation by Bahrain that CEDAW must be compatible
with Sharia' a law is consistent with the Bahraini Islamic legal infrastructure,
social patterns and in general Bahraini culture. It is worth mentioning that
the Republic of France has also some reservations as the CEDAW has to
be compatible with the French social and legal culture. Further, pursuant
to the French Constitution of 4th of October, 1958, and as stipulated in
article 55, the international treaty, after ratification, supersedes ordinary
legislation in France.
6- It is of fundamental importance to refer that most of the Arab countries
have ratified the CEDAW with same reservations as the Kingdom of Bahrain.
7- It is suggested that the substantive equality between women and men,
from an international perspective, doesn't mean equality in all rights as it
is granted to men, so it has to be copied, pasted and granted to women, but
it means in its right interpretation that each gender has to enjoy the rights
which are compatible with its nature. On the other hand, from some western
perspectives, men has to exercise some duties towards family and children
to enable women to enjoy the right to work, equal wages, equal opportunity
and many other rights.
38

