--- Page 1 ---
The Legislative& Judicial Pursuit of Technology Issues
‹The Areas of Intersection and Closeness›
The Legislative& Judicial Pursuit of Technology Issues
‹The Areas of Intersection and Closeness›
By: Ameera Al Taan
LLM ( Queen Mary, University of London)
Legal Counsel
Introduction:
he technology (Computer Devices, Internet, Smart-phones, mus
nnovations..etc.) had solved many problems of our lives, and the interne
now constitutes a transformative and powerful
medium for social,
commercial, political and cultural life. Nevertheless, it brought with it large-
cale problems that had in most cases a dangerous impact when used in
illegal ways, whether by willful conduct or by negligence. The illegal way
to use the technology brings negative impact in diminishing the drive and
economic incentive.
Therefore, legislative and judicial efforts should be intensified to vitalize
the existing laws or to improve and modernized the future implementation
of intellectual property rights (IPR) system, commercial competition and
monopoly system, confidentiality and freedom of expression
and other
areas of law.
It is of vital importance to focus on the speech of the American President
Barak Obama, where he made it clear that 1 : «our single greatest asset is
the innovation and the ingenuity and creativity of the American people.»
An open Internet is vital to creativity, free expression, and innovation. A key
Part of preserving these qualities is ensuring that we have the right legal
tools to counter criminal conduct that harms our creators and users (and
our country's economic health) in the face of continuous technological
advances. It is essential that in doing so, we preserve the openness, privacy,
security, and creativity of the Internet and its users'.
The current legal and judicial debate among the entrepreneurs reveals
kind of frustration with regards to technological and purely technical
matters, as they thought that the legal system couldn't protect their sides
despite the innovative ideas and devices that they create or that the courts
could not cope or adapt with the highly technical arena that needs an
experts-dominated insights.
1. http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/intellectualproperty/quotes

--- Page 2 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
Ultimately, I donot agree with the saying that the "Law cannot keep track
of technology issues" 1 , as the law will be always approaching the technology
advancement through the common legal senses that stem from the respected
previously-entertained provisions, opinions and jurisprudence.
Even that the technology moves fast, the legal concepts move stably. And
even that judges or "justices" -as called in some jurisdictions- themselves are
not very technology-savvy, they may have loud and clear arguments.
I hereby would like to mention that, with all my respect to famous
entrepreneurs in the current era who stand firmly to accuse the lawmakers
of negativity of pursuing the technology matters, I have different opinion,
even that I frowns the harsh behavior of law enforcement officers when they
catch on alleged violators, and event that some regulatory gaps existed.
To understand the main areas of the subject matter, we hereby needs to
go through the below mentioned topics.
Identifying and determining the scope of the problem:
1- Extremely rapid technological change and the slow
legislative reform process:
Frankly speaking, It 1s not the legal arena alone that faces the reaction of
the continued rapid advancement of technological change, other scientists,
ethnic traditions, ideological viewpoints, and philosophical and religious
beliefs are all having different reactions.
Citizens of the world are no longer isolated, as the "open source"
movement has extended into the global networking community and broken
through the haze of national boundaries 2 . We are all turning together
as we face one of the most immediate issues that will affect the future of
humanity-the technological advances in biotechnology, nanotechnology,
and artificial intelligence.
This means that we need to understand that the innovation could not be
initially 1magined, predicted or anticipated, especially the emerging aspects
and the challenges that may face not the current inhabitants of the earth,
but rather may affect the future generations.
1 http://www.technologyreview.com/view/526401/laws-and-ethics-cant-keep-pace-with-
technology/
2. http://www.natasha.cc/technologicalchange.htm
Volume 1 - @anoniya 5

--- Page 3 ---
The Legislative& Judicial Pursuit of Technology Issues
‹The Areas of Intersection and Closeness›
The developments in computer technology are occurring every day. With
every new protocol, product or application that is developed, more doors are
opened to computer intrusion and misuse. Most of the time it is not even
known that a problem exists until vulnerability is found and exploited.
The other essential part of the problem is that we shall realized that some
sort of law needs to be established to offer protection against misuse, and the
process begins to develop a law. Laws take time to be formulated, finalized
and approved before they go into effect. This however, is a necessary evil, as
laws influence our public interest, our environment, economy, education,
our families, our health and virtually every aspect of our daily lives, now
and for generations to come. To make new laws or change those already on
the books, lawmakers follow time-honored constitutional procedures 1 . The
slow legislature reform process is sometimes long overdue, sometimes for
reasons related to striking a balance between the long-term benefits to the
people and protecting the public interest against dishonest or dangerous
practices, or for saving the rights of the innocent and legal use that is
different than the illegal use, or for reasons of maintaining the minimum
safeguards and minimum public safety requirements. These are all justified
reasons.
2- The rights that matter:
Most of the rights and freedoms that the technology may keep in danger are:
• Confidentiality and theright to privacy (Misuse of private information)
which comes under it the fraudulent use and unauthorized access of
devices and other cyber crimes.
Intellectual Property Rights: (trademarks, copyrights and patent
rights)
• Right of establishing businesses: in the negative form of illegal
commercial competition and monopoly or engaging in other abusive
practices.
Freedom of expression.
As we realize the rights that the illegal or defaulted use of technology
could affect, it is very important to highlight the:
3- The harm thresholds:
• In case of confidentiality, privacy and other unauthorized access and
cybercrimes, we can imagine a large-scale online piracy and hacking
1 http://www.sans.org/reading-room/whitepapers/legal/legal-system-ethics-information-
security-54
6

--- Page 4 ---
حث باللغة الانجليزية
We can also imagine the case of violating the privacy when the law
enforcement officers seized and searched the smart phones of a
suspect as will explained later on. It is very important to mention that
the misuse of information in any manner could lead to wide-scale
crimes such as the money laundering and/or for terrorism purposes.
In case of IPR, we can imagine the illegal willful streaming-basec
infringement of copvrighted
.movies, music, and television on the
Internet, in another way we can use the phrase of reproduction and
distribution of infringing content.
• In case of commercial competition, we can imagine an electronic
company that enters the market as a new non-stopping company to
disrupt the local market to a large degree.
In case of freedom of expression, we can imagine a libel case through
social media, in which the society keeps asking how it can balance
accountability with free speech. Or, as an example, a Facebook user
in England for example sues another user in Australia for defamatory
comments posted on the site. We can also take in mind the derogatory
comments.
Another important issue is to define the jurisdiction, let us take the
above-mentioned brief example, which country has jurisdiction over
the case, and which country's laws should be applied: England's,
Australia's or those of the United States, where Facebook is based?
4- The Judicial role:
However, despite the legal procedures for enacting a law, the judicial and
the Alternative Dispute Resolutions tools are the vital soil and the source
that always convince the legislators to face the problems or to minimize the
potential risks in a given subject matter
Here we will shed lights on some examples of the judicial, especially "the
courts findings" in USA and UK, with a glance mentioning of the situation
in Bahrain.
First: The judicial situation in the United States of
America:
A- The case of "Yahoo", and the specification of
jurisdiction:
Jurisdiction is a major stumbling block for the legal system when it
comes to dealing with computers, networks and their security. In the US,
the court must have jurisdiction over the person or the subject matter of ،
.1
http://law.justia.com/cases/federal/appellate-courts/F3/433/1199/546158/
Volume 1 - Danoniya
7

--- Page 5 ---
The Legislative& Judicial Pursuit of Technology Issues
‹The Areas of Intersection and Closeness›
lawsuit in order to be able to try it. This works well with the current setup
of law enforcement agencies that are very territorial and operate within
distinct district, city, county, state or country lines. All of this however, gets
thrown out the window when there are no physical boundaries to go by
when determining jurisdiction, as is the case when it comes to computer
networks and the Internet.
Perhaps no case highlights the confusing thicket of jurisdictional issues
on the Web more than the Yahoo imbroglio. The saga began two years ago
when two French human rights groups sued rahoo, arguing that the postins
›f historical Nazi items on the company's U.S.-based site violated French
law prohibiting the display of racist material. A French judge sided with the
groups, ordering Yahoo to block French citizens from accessing the site or
tace steep fines. However, rahoo turned to the U.S. courts and asked a judge
to declare the French law unenforceable here.
Now, the company is facing another set of charges that it, along with
former CEO Koogle, violated the country's war crime laws by displaying the
items. In perhaps the most curious aspect of the case, the American Yahoo
site at issue had no physical presence in France.
B- (Riley v. California) 1 and (United States v. Wurie) 2
and the case of seizing and searching the data and infor-
mation of suspect's cell-phone:
The Supreme Court, on June 25th, 2014, ruled that it is illegal for cops to
search a suspect's cell phone without a warrant. So, it is no longer acceptable
for law enforcement to search a phone just because they seized it. The opinion
was written by Chief Justice John Roberts, with all nine members of the court
signing on. It's the result of two cases - a federal drug and gun case from
Massachusetts, and a state gun case from California - where the defendants
were charged and convicted based on evidence cops found while searching
their phones. One case (Riley v. California) involved a smartphone; the other
(United States v. Wurie) involved a search of a flip phone 3. The Wurie case
was based on an arrest in 2007. The first iPhone had just come out, and nearly
all cellphone owners had flip phones. TheRiley case was based on a 2009
arrest, when smart phones were a lot more common. Because flip phones
can store a lot less data than cellphones, and aren't as likely to interact with
external cloud servers to get data, the Court wasn't sure that it should treat
http://wings.buffalo.edu/law/bcls/2014/Team-23-Brief.pdf
2. -http://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/cert/13-212
http://www.vox.com/2014/6/25/5841936/supreme-court-cell-phone-privacy-wurie-riley-
roberts-decision-nsa

--- Page 6 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
both cases as the same. So when it heard oral arguments in April (when both
ides argued their cases in person), It looked at both cases Independently
3ut in fact, the court decided, both phones had access to digital data thal
cops shouldn't have unrestricted access to. So today's decision covers both
cases, because it uses the same reasoning. The importance of the Supreme
Court's decision stems from that the Court itself has had other cases about
privacy and technology, and in most cases, the government has said that
new technologies aren't that different from old ones - so the old rules for
searches and surveillance, which allow law enforcement to do a lot, should
still apply. But Today's opinion is one of the first decisions that actually
tackled the technology head on. The government argued that the old rules
allowing cops to search physical objects applied to cellphones as well, so
cops wouldn»t need a warrant. But they also suggested some «fallback
options» in case the court wanted to require warrants in some cases but not
others. Allowing warrantless searches if it is reasonable to believe it holds
evidence relevant to the crime. This is the standard for car searches. But that
standard, the court says, would «prove no practical limit at all when it comes
to cell phone searches.» There's so much information in a cellphone that any
cop could «come up with several reasons» to conduct a search, no matter the
crime. Searching only the areas of the phone that could have information
about the crime, who the suspect was, or officer safety. The court shot this
down for the same reason: that's still a massive amount of data. Getting
just information that police would be able to get through other means. The
government argued that 1f, for example, It could Just ask the phone company
for a record of the suspect's calls, it might as well get them from the phone
itself. But the court said, «No, no, it doesn't work that way. You went and got
the information directly, and that's different.» That, he says, establishes ar
important distinction based on how the government can get informatlon
Cops are allowed to search a person's body atter they arrest him, and they
are allowed to examine any physical items they find. That includes opening
things up to see what's inside them: in one of the cases referenced in today's
decision, police opened a cigarette pack they'd found in a suspect›s pocket
and discovered heroin inside. And police are allowed to search arrestee›s
cars under certain circumstances. In all of those cases, the court has decided
that searches don't seriously threaten an individual's right to privacy — at
least not once he is already been arrested. But today, they declared that the
reasoning that makes It okay to open a pack of cigarettes doesn't make it
Kav to search a cellphone: Modern cell bbones, as a categor, mblcate briva‹
oncerns far bevond those implicated by the search of a cigarette pack, a wallet, c
And because of that, they say, cops need to get a warrant to search a
phone in nearly all cases — just like they would have to get a warrant to
search a house. The implication is that the court recognizes that today's
volume 1 - @anoniya 9

--- Page 7 ---
The Legislative& Judicial Pursuit of Technology Issues
‹The Areas of Intersection and Closeness>
technology requires new rules for what people can expect to keep private.
The cell phones are different because they can store a lot of information.
The court considers a phone with 16 gigabytes of storage space on it (like the
iPhone 5c or Samsung Galaxy S4). That is equivalent to «millions of pages
of text, thousands of pictures, or hundreds of videos.» And that means that
it's possible to reconstruct someone›s entire life just based on data found on
the phone: "The sum of an individual›s private life can be reconstructed through
a thousand photographs labeled with dates, locations, and descriptions, the same
cannot be said of a photograph or two ofloved ones tucked into a wallet".
In the court's mind, that's a lot of privacy to give up for not a lot of
law enforcement benefit. They often store very personal information. The
court compares this to everyone walking around with a diary all the time: "A
decade ago officers might have occasionally stumbled across a bighly personal item
such as a diary, but today many of the more than 90% of American adults who own
cell phones keep on their person a digital record of nearly every aspect of their lives".
The court even uses the catchphrase «there's an app for that» to point
out how much extra information is on users' phones. They call all this
information «the privacies of life.» In fact, the court's language to describe
how personal cell-phone data is could be read as a reference: They have access
to remote cloud servers that are nowhere near the person under arrest. Even
the federal government, which argued in favor of cops being able to search
phones, agreed that it wouldn't be okay for cops to access information from
cloud servers. But the court points out that cops probably don't know where
information is stored just by looking through the phone. When you take all
of these together, the court concludes, it's ridiculous to say that cell phones
iren't different from other things that could be in someone's pocket: "The
United States asserts that a search of all data stored on a cell phone is «materiall)
indistinguishable» from searches of these sorts of physical items... Ihat is like saying
a ride on horseback is materially indistinguishable from a flight to the moon. Both
are ways of getting from point A to point B, but little else justifies lumping them
together". In fact, the court says, searching a cell phone is even more intrusive
than searching a house. And since cops definitely need a warrant before
searching a suspect's house, they should have to get one for his phone, too.
There was already a loophole that allowed cops to conduct warrantless
searches of things that would otherwise require a warrant, if there were
«exigent circumstances.» That exception applies to cell-phone searches too.
But it has to be determined on a case-by-case basis. Justice Alito did not agree
with the whole decision and he wrote a concurrence - he voted with the rest
of the court for the criminal defendants over the government, but he wanted
to make it clear that his reasoning was slightly different from Chief Justice
Roberts›. Basically, Alito thought that the Chief Justice's opinion didn't
give enough respect to police officers› need to get evidence about a crime
10

--- Page 8 ---
حث باللغة الانجليزية
by searching the suspect. Roberts' opinion said that the reason for officers
to search a suspect was to protect their safety and prevent evidence from
getting destroyed; Alito thinks that it is also legitimate for the law to allow
searches just because of the evidence they provide. But he still agreed that it
wasn't reasonable to allow cell phone searches for this reason just because
cops can search physical objects. Alito also explicitly called on Congress
and state legislatures to make new laws that could guide warrantless cell
PastrumenteSne thinks chat cell phone s earc hes are toe important 1012 15t.
century crime-fighting for the question of regulating them to be left up to
the courts.
The above court's ruling means a lot to (Smith v. Maryland) — the case
the government uses to justify NSA surveillance. As, after the ruling today,
government saying new technologies should be governed by the same
Supreme Court decisions as old ones.
C- (American Broadcasting Companies v. Aereo 1) and
the case of violating the copyrights law:
Despite the above well-phrased ruling, it is not surprising me that at the
same day the Supreme Court issued its judgment in (American Broadcasting
Companies v. Aereo 2) where it ruled that : the service provided by Aereo,
allowing subscribers to view live and time-shifted streams of over-the-air
television on Internet-connected devices, violated copyright laws. The Court's
decision describes Aereo as not being «simply an equipment provider, » with
an «overwhelming likeness to cable companies» that «performs petitioners'
works ‹publicly.›» Further, the Court adds that its decision should not
discourage the emergence or use of different kinds of technologies.
However, l'm admired that Justices Scalia, Thomas and Alito dissented
to the above ruling, writing for the dissenting minority, Scalia quoted from
(Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc.), noting that the
broadcasters made similar predictions regarding the VCR. Like the final
Paragraph in that previous ruling, he stated that the Court should be in no
position to make judgments on recently new technologies, and it is instead
Congress's job to determine if the copyright laws should be modified to
address these issues. It is important to mention that, Justices Antonin Scalia
and Clarence Thomas are the most frequent ally, and deep orignalists of
laws, despite that the analysts say that Scalia is taking the original public
meaning approach and Thomas is taking the original intent approach 3.
1. http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/13pdf/13-461_1537.pdf
2. -http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/13pdf/13-461_1537.pdf
.3
- Mark Walsh, The Quiet Man: Once again, experts sound off on Justice's Thomas' silence. ABA
Journal, May 2014, Page 20 -21 (The Docket).
Volume 1 - @anoniya 11

--- Page 9 ---
The Legislative& Judicial Pursuit of Technology Issues
‹The Areas of Intersection and Closeness›
It worths mentioning that in August last year Google was fined £13.8m
in the US after being found guilty of circumventing security settings on
the iPad, iPhone, Mac and Safari browser in order to collect user data for
advertising. This is not coming to hinder the technology, it is coming to
foster and enhance the rights of the people that stand as threshold that
cannot be overcome.
D- (Alice Corporation vs. CLS Bank 1) : The Patent Trolls2:
It is very interesting to read the various views of the US Supreme Court
regarding the "Patent Trolls" issues. In June 2014, the Supreme Court upheld
the notion that an idea alone can't be patented; deciding unanimously that
merely implementing an idea on a computer isn't enough to transform it
into a patentable (Tangible) invention. The decision does leave room for
Patenting specific ways of implementing an idea, but it could prevent some
of the most frivolous patent cases from moving forward.
cases have become an enormous problem in recent years,
particularly in the tech industry. The industry is plagued by an increasing
number of "patent trolls," companies that exist solely to force money out of
others using patents, and many large companies now spend an enormous
amount of time and money detending themselves from patents that should
never have been granted in the first place. Legislators and activists have long
pushed for new patent laws in an effort to solve this problem, but recent
efforts have stalled, and today's court decision can help limit the problem
while other bills are penned
The case in question was (Alice Corporation vs. CLS 3)Bank. Alice
Corporation, a financial company based in Australia, holds a number of
patents for facilitating financial exchanges between two parties by using a
-omputer as a third party. CLS Bank, a foreign currency exchange company.
Iled a claim that the patents were "invalid, unenforceable, or not infringed,'
and then Alice countered with a claim that CLS was infringing its patents.
The court ruled in favor of CLS, reasoning that third party intermediation is
1. http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/13pdf/13-298_71h8.pdf
2. http://www.wired.com/2014/06/supreme-court-deals-major-blow-to-patent-trolls/
.3
JUSTICE THOMAS delivered the opinion of the Court: The patents at issue in this case disclose a
computer implemented scheme for mitigating "settlement risk" (i.e., the risk that only one party
to a financial transaction will pay what it owes) by using a third-party intermediary. The question
presented is whether these claims are patent eligible under 35 U. S. C. §101, or are instead drawn
to a patent-ineligible abstract idea. We hold that the claims at issue are drawn to the abstract idea
of intermediated settlement, and that merely requiring generic computer implementation fails
to transform that abstract idea into a patent-eligible invention. http://www.supremecourt.gov/
opinions/13pdf/13-298_71h8.pdf
12

--- Page 10 ---
حث باللغة الانجليزية
a fundamental building block of the economy, and not a novel invention and
that "merely requiring generic computer implementation fails to transform
that abstract idea into a patent-eligible invention."
The decision is important because many software patent cases are based
on ideas rather than implementations, says Julie Samuels, executive director
at the public policy think tank and research outfit Engine. "Most of the
troll cases involve software patents of dubious quality," she says. "What the
Supreme Court did in the Alice vs CLS case is give parties dealing with those
various patents a very important tool to fight back by invalidating those
patents and, going forward, gives the patent office instruction about what it
can and cannot issue patents on.''
E- (Cohen V. Google 1): the case of anonymity and immu-
nity in social media:
In August 2008, a user of Blogger.com, a Google subsidiary, created
«Skanks in NYC.» The blog assailed Liskula Cohen, 37, a Canadian-born
cover girl who has appeared in Vogue and other fashion magazines, by
featuring photos of Cohen captioned with derogatory terms. Cohen sued
Google to learn the name of the anonymous blogger on the grounds that the
post was defamatory and libelous. A New York Supreme Court judge ordered
Google to reveal the anonymous blogger's name, and Google complied.
The case provided insight into the debate between the competing values
of privacy and free speech
F- Hosted Web Videos and the Video Privacy Protection
Act of 1998 :
Websites are facing lawsuits alleging that the information collected and
transmitted about viewers of their video content violates the Video Privacy
Protection Act (VPPA), a 1988 law originally aimed at prohibiting video rental
companies from disclosing the video tape rental records of consumer 2.
The VPPA prohibits a video tape service provider from knowingly
lisclosing, to any person, personally identihable information concerning
any consumer of the provider without the consumer's informed, writter
consent. VPPA provides for a private right of action, including statutory
damages not less than $2,500 per consumer plus attorneys' fees.
http://www.nylslawreview.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/16/2013/11/55-1.Cheverud.pd
http://www.natlawreview.com/article/you-better-watch-out-new-legal-risks-hosted-web-video
Volume 1 - @anoniya 13

--- Page 11 ---
The Legislative& Judicial Pursuit of Technology Issues
‹The Areas of Intersection and Closeness›
Second: The situation in the Judicial system of the Unit-
ed Kingdom:
A- The "Google Case" "Safari users against Google's se-
cret tracking", the issue of jurisdiction:
The High Court ruled on Thursday 16th Jan 2014 that Google can be
sued by a group of Britons over an alleged breach of privacy, despite the
company being based in the US and claiming that the case was not serious
enough to fall under British jurisdiction. Google faced a group action by
users of Apple's Safari browser who were angered by the way their online
habits were apparently tracked against their wishes in order to provide
targeted advertising, they claim that the company acted contrary to a 2009
amendment to an EU directive which requires consent before cookies are
placed on a user's device for advertising purposes. A spokesperson for
Google said: "A case almost identical to this one was dismissed in its entirety
three months ago in the US. We still don't think that this case meets the
standards required in the UK for it to go to trial, and we'll be appealing
today's ruling." This case appears to stand to help the UK customers and UK
users who used the services provided by European subsidiaries, but for me,
the important lesson is to go in depth on the protection of technology and
not merely allowing the case to be sued.
However, with regard to the mobile device «smartphone patent wars",
Samsung applied to the High Courtof Justice, Chancery Division, in Samsung
Electronics (UK) Limited & Anr v. Apple Inc., for a declaration that its Galaxy
tablets were not too similar to Apple's products. Apple counterclaimed, but
Samsung prevailed after a British judge ruled Samsung's Galaxy tablets were
not "cool»
enough to be confused with Apple's iPad. In July 2012, British
judge Birss denied Samsung's motion for an injunction blocking Apple from
publicly stating that the Galaxy infringed Apple's design rights, but ordered
Apple to publish a disclaimer on Apple's own website and in the media that
Samsung did not copy the iPad. The judge stayed the publishing order,
however, until Apple's appeal was heard in October 2012. When the case
eached the court ot :
hat Apple is required to publish isclaim er on & Was Ppo teds mcanin
B- The triumph of the TV-Links case and its relationship
with the UK's Federation against Copyright Theft Or-
ganization (FACT1)
1. http://torrentfreak.com/busted-tv-show-site-in-limbo-as-authorities-back-off-081121/
14

--- Page 12 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
(TV-Links), a site which embedded videos from YouTube-like sites, was
targeted by the police and the MPAA-funded FACT anti-piracy group.
When news broke that TV-Links.co.uk had been raided by police and
admin David Rock arrested, it was met with a certain element of disbelief.
TV-Links was not a warez (illegally copied software), but one which linked to
videos hosted on sites like YouTube. It carried absolutely zero illicit content.
This major detail was not of much concern to the UK's Federation against
Copyright Theft (FACT), whose investigation along with Trading Standards
later came to involve the police. FACT built a case against the operators of
TV-Links, David Rock and site partner David Overton who was raided 5
months later.
David Rock later explained that it would have been an easy task for
FACT to track him down, since he never made any attempts at secrecy. "To
be honest I didn't really attempt to hide my ID, as under UK Law linking to
another site isn't illegal, so I didn't see the need," he told TorrentFreak in a
November 2008 interview.
There was confusion as to the basis for the initial raid, with FACT citing
"offenses relating to the facilitation of copyright infringement on the
Internet" _ an offense that doesn't even exist under UK law - with Trading
Standards and the police referring to "supplying property with a registered
trade mark without permission." After a long wait, the official allegations
became conspiracy to defraud and breaches of the Copyright Designs and
Patents Act.
More than 2 years of waiting later, in January 2010 the TV-Links case went
to court. On the 19th January 2010 the operators of TV-Links - represented
by Morgan Rose Solicitors, counsel William Clegg QC and Alex Stein for
David Rock, and lan Bridge for David Overton - raised preliminary points
of law and asked for the proceedings to be dismissed.
Judge Ticehurst gave his judgment, announcing that TV-Links had won
their case. He ruled in detail for the first time in a Crown Court in relation to
Section 17 of the European Commerce Directive 2000, stating that Section
17 indeed applied and afforded TV-Links a complete defense in criminal
proceedings in England and Wales for their linking to other web sites. In a
nutshell and to coin a familiar phrase, the site was deemed a mere conduit of
information. The Judge also ruled that the allegations under the Copyright
Designs and Patents Act failed because there was no evidence that TV-Links
made available to the public the films and shows they linked to. There is no
appeal available to FACT against this ruling. The Judge noted that FACT had
not applied the Attorney General's guidelines when deciding to prosecute
Volume 1 - @anoniya 15

--- Page 13 ---
The Legislative& Judicial Pursuit of Technology Issues
‹The Areas of Intersection and Closeness›
the defendants with Conspiracy to Defraud.
C-The partial triumph of FileSoup icase and the OiNK2:
Two men who ran FileSoup, a site to help users find films to download
via BitTorrent, have been found "not guilty".
Stephen Lanning, from Somerset and George Cartledge, from Glasgow
eportedly taced charges ot conspiracy to intringe copyright, but the Crow
rosecution Service decided not to proceed with a trial to nail the du
after following legal advice, which apparently said the alleged copyright
infringements were a civil, not criminal matter.
The men were apparently arrested in August 2009 after police were tipped
off by film industry body FACT. Their charges were reportedly for alleged
unlawful sharing of a trio of films including X-Men Origins: Wolverine,
which was leaked onto file sharing networks in April 2009 ahead of its
official release, forcing the FBI to investigate.
Alan Ellis, the administrator of BitTorrent site OiNK was apparently
acquitted of conspiracy to defraud by a jury around this time last year, after
arguing he simply offered a service a bit like Google and was not responsible
if users of his service chose to infringe copyright. Just like FileSoup, OiNK
posted links to BitTorrent downloads, but did not directly share music and
Cartledge is solicitor, David Cook, who also represented OiNK, told one
newspaper that: «This case is not a one-off. We have now seen two prosecutions
for allegations such as these which were fundamentally flawed. We have persistently
worked in exposing the flaws in these cases which have resulted in the absolute failure
ofboth prosecutions.»
Simon Morgan, managing partner of Morgan Rose Solicitors, of the firm
that represented Lanning, reportedly said: «We are pleased to see that a sensible
and appropriate view was ultimately taken by the CPS to offer no evidence in the
case. The Court of Appeal has found that cases involving complex issues of copyright
law are much more appropriately heard in the civil courts rather than the criminal
courts.»
.1
https://torrentfreak.com/court-drops-filesoup-bittorrent-case-administrators-walk-
free-110224/
2. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/news/8345801/Prosecutors-drop-piracy-case-against-
film-sharing-website.html
16

--- Page 14 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
D- The mind-boggling case of ACS:Law 1:
ACS:Law was a United Kingdom law firm specializing in intellectual law.
In January 2011, ACS:Law, acting for its client MediaCAT, attempted
to gain judgements against 26 suspected illegal file sharers. The case' was
heard in the Patents County Court in London by Judge Colin Birss. Shortly
after proceedings started, ACS:Law attempted to drop the case. It was also
reported that barristers for ACS:Law failed to provide vital documents due
to them being «in storage». As the copyright holders were not present in
court, Judge Birss was unable to end the case in a «simple» fashion. Judge
Birss criticised ACS:Law, saying the case was «mind-boggling».
Through a statement read to court on 24 January 2011, Crossley
announced that he was withdrawing from pursuing claims against alleged
illegal file sharers, citing criminal attacks and bomb threats as reasons. In
response, Judge Colin Birss said «I am not happy. I am getting the impression
with every twist and turn since I started looking at these cases that there
is a desire to avoid any judicial scrutiny» On 8 February 2011, Judge Birs:
told ACS:Law that the claims which had been brought to court could not be
discontinued without the permission of the copyright holders, and a further
hearing was set for 16 March. At this hearing the cases were officially closed.
The judge deferred a decision on legal costs, saying: «If ever there was a case
with conduct out of the norm it was this one».
Third: In Bahrain:
In the midst of diversity in the ways of perpetrating a crime, deterrent
›enalty in the law is needed to protect the community from risk. The law
should evolve to address the technology-criminal phenomena in the soclet)
that pose a threat to stability and security, especially with the evolution
of means of communication that facilitated difficulty with regard to the
Pattern of crime.
In Gulf region including Bahrain, there are some cases of stealing through
credit cards or via internet banking account.
In October 20142, Bahrain issued a new law regarding the Cybercrimes
"Information Technology's Crimes Law" (Cyber Crime Law no. 60 of 2014),
in this Law, hackers could face up to 10 years behind bars. The new bill
carries fines of up to BD100, 000. The penalties include a year imprisonment
or BD30, 000 fine for those who gain unauthorized access to computer
systems. People who deliberately hack into networks with the purpose of
1. http://torrentfreak.com/file-sharing-lawyers-to-face-disciplinary-tribunal-100823/
.2
http://www.legalaffairs.gov.bh/AdvancedSearchDetails.aspx?id=71402#.VH64F9KsVZc
Volume 1 - @anoniya 17

--- Page 15 ---
The Legislative& Judicial Pursuit of Technology Issues
‹The Areas of Intersection and Closeness›
destroying them or damaging information will face imprisonment or a fine
ot BD50, 000, or both. Those who produce pornography or broadcast it using
technology and telecommunications will be sentenced up to a year in jail or
fined up to BD10, 000, or both depending on the pornographic material
associated with the case. However, if the case is related to child pornography
then the offender will face two years in jail or BD10,000, or both. The bill
will also give the Public Prosecution the power to stop the broadcast of any
information on the Internet, hide the information or enter computerized
accounts if necessary for an investigation.
However, the Bahraini courts, has few cases regarding to technology
issues. Still this area needs to be developed, but at the end, as long as the
law has recently emerged, then it had benefited from the international best
practices and had anticipated most of the areas of cybercrimes as only one
side that relates to technology. It is very important to mention that other
laws that maintain other areas such as the intellectual property rights law
and the commercial completion law and other rights and freedoms are all
maintained through the legislation and the constitution.
Conclusion:
It seems that the new inventions in any country are imposing their
existence on the Judicial and legislative helds to let the latter cope with this
inventions' trend. It seems also that the judges should be malleable to study
the changes and their consequences, whether from human rights laws point
of view, common law perspectives and civic movements.
The legislatures also need to be not only active in tackling on the critical
areas of technology, they should be 'proactive" so that to chase the needed
forward-thinking economy. Moreover, the law should have pr-emptive
impact with lots of imagination to the scenarios and tactics.
It is clear that some litigated cases,
taking the example of PRS
infringements are time and cost-consuming, therefore I admired the
European Commission Fifth Monitoring Report of Patent Settlements in
the Pharmaceutical Sector 1, as the patent settlements enable patent-related
disputes to be resolved without having to litigate the infringement or the
There is an essential need also to have an analytic legal review of whether
the so called protessional liability insurance or the all risks policy insurance
may serve in reducing the cases of cyber security, competition or IPRs
1. http://www.natlawreview.com/article/eu-commission-publishes-fifth-report-patent-
settlements-pharmaceutical-sector
18

--- Page 16 ---
حث باللغة الانجليزية
infringements, and if so, to which extent?
I hereby call for the formation of a legislative committee in the parliament
whose mission would be to consult with American and European trends as
a face of object cooperation in the framework of adopting the best practices
in legislation of IPRs, competition and privacy
It is appropriate to suggest that supporting the judiciary with an experts
Judicial experts) of cyber crimes and in helping to distinguish betweet
he good faith use and the willful misconduct (i.e. the hackers and interne
pirates), so that the technology and the eligibility or non eligibility of
punishment through different penalties go hand in hand.
It is strongly recommended that strengthening the researches that pay
attention to the development of criminality in the intellectual property
issues through the computer and the Internet,
is fundamental taking into
account international experience.
volume 1 - @anoniya 19

