--- Page 1 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English anc
American Legislative and Judicial Practice
By Ameera Hasan AlTaan
LLM, Queen Mary, Unwversity of London
Legal Counselor, Babrain Chamber of Commerce and Industry
Introduction:
For the sake of purifying the smooth flow and continuation of companies'
business without disturbing the interests of its members, the services, and
the interests of society in large, and for the purpose of maintaining prevailing
commercial and corporate quality in the country without tampering with
fraud and deceptive methods, comes this comparative research, which
highlights, from legal point of view, the issue of piercing the corporate veil
of a company -in whatever form it choose to be established- whenever it has
proven to be used as a shield or veil to pass personal or illegitimate purposes
contrary to the purposes of the law and regulations. This paper reflects the
latest amendments to the Bahraini Commercial Companies Law, with some
practical applications, and comparing it with the prominent issues raised in
the English and American courts and jurist opinions.
The major effect of piercing is that a company s partners will no longer
be able to rely on the corporate shield -especially in the limited lability
company- when they are planning to use this corporate shield to hide the
real rooted reason of their doubtful actions or omissions and therefore they
might be liable in their own funds.
We will discuss various cases of corporate veil piercing as wll as the
surrounding issues that revolve around how to get closer to the shareholder,
director, owner's personal monies, such as the extent of the auditor's
responsibility, and whether the insurance on director's liability will stand
of not, we will aslo mention new concept, which is the "reverse piercing"
where the American lawyers might tend to apply for reasons of achieving
the justice and fairness. The areas of international arbitration, especially
the international investments arbitrations pose a tremendous importance
because of its complexity and the diffulty of Enforcing the arbitration award.
The purpose of this research is not to integrate a plan of action with
regard to the multiple aspects in this tremendous area of law, but to highlight
the relevant important legal provisions that clarify the importance of the
members of boards of directors or managers' conduct based on the utmost

--- Page 2 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
expected duties that fully affect their individual and collective interests in
the community.
The scope of the research:
The research is limited to the Bahraini, English and American legislative
and judicial practice. There is limited reference to arbitration -particularly
international arbitration.
Brief content:
addition to discussing briefly the surrounding issues as aforesaid mentioned
in the introduction.
1. Shortcut definition of "Corporate Veil"
The most important outcome of establishing a company is the legal
existence as it has independent personality from its partners, this was not
recognized from the outset, as evidenced by the old legal regulations, there
were no separation of company's accounts and its partners receivables. The
emergence of companies and different trade relations in the Middle Ages
intensify the need to separate the company's accounts from the partners'
personal funds and to consider the company as an independent personality
autonomous from its partners and its monies shall be the guarantee to
creditors, a matter that improves monitoring of the companies' overall
business.
In English Law, there is a correlation between two ideas; the first one is
the (Incorporation by registration which was introduced in 1844) and the
second idea is the (limited liability of a company) which was followed in
1855. Subsequently in 1897 in Salomon v. Salomon & Co. Ltd. the House
of Lords effected the principles of corporate entity and limited liability into
the English law where it has been decided that a company is a distinct legal
person entirely different from the members of that company (shareholders,
officers, directors...etc.) with separate rights and liabilities. Some argue that
it is a vital fiction in the sense that individuals might balk at launching new
ventures if it meant their personal assets were readily at risk.
Of course, the doctrine was recognized much earlier than in Salomon,
see, for instance, Edmunds v Brown and Tillard (1668), where members
were held not liable on the bond of a corporation after its dissolution,
and Foss v Harbottle 1843. The true significance of Salomon's case in its
more immediate context is that it confirmed the legitimacy of the "private"
company and paved the way for its recognition by statute in 1907 .
(1) See: Piercing the Corporate Veil, when is too much fiction a bad thing? By will Hill Tankersley and
Kelly Brenan, the Alabama Lawyer, January 2010. Vol. 71, No.1.
Cases and materials in Company Law, LS Sealy, Seventh edition, Oxford University Press.
Volume 5 - @anoniya 5

--- Page 3 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
Therefore, it is deeply rooted that a corporation or a company is treated
1S a separate legal person, which is solely responsible for the debts it incur:
Ind the sole beneficiary of the credit it is owed, therefore, many busines
owners or partners establish their ventures under a corporate structure
in an effort to protect their personal assets from claims made by internal
and/or external intervening factors, and therefore any liability incurred by
the company does not extend to its shareholders (beyond any money paid
for the purchase of their shares), and its directors (beyond any personal
liability, which they might have, for violation of their duties as directors of
the company). This, in a nutshell, creates the sense of "corporate (fictional)
veil" as a fundamental legal term to intensify that assets and liabilities of a
corporation are separate from the assets and liabilities of its shareholders
and that this rule protects shareholders from being liable personally for the
company's debts and other obligations.
This article firstly explains what is understood by the terms corporate
veil's piercing. Secondly, it discusses several English Law cases that are dealing
with this issue and how it has developed over time. Thirdly, it compares this
doctrine with the approach accepted in the American Law and discusses the
doctrine under the Bahraini Law especially under the new amendments of
the current Commercial Companies Law. It also deals with some economic
implications of lifting the corporate veil.
"Piecing the Corporate Veil" (The exception of the rule):
In the English Law, although the Salomon principle has never been
doubted, however, under certain circumstances the courts may be poised to
disregard this principle and "lift the corporate veil." Nevertheless, the cases
in which the courts have allowed the veil to be lifted are difficult to predict
and no clear set of principles has emerged yet.
From the creditors' point of view, the consequence of the limited liability
principle is that creditors' claims are restricted to the company's assets and
cannot be asserted against the shareholders' assets. On the other hand,
shareholders benefit from the limited liability principle because (i) once the
›usiness 1s Successtul, It Is them who gan the proht, and (11) in the event tha
he company is wound up their liability would be limited only to the value
of their unpaid shares or their guarantee; i.e. the satisfaction of unsecured
creditors' claims is endangered without shareholders being responsible.
All in all, if a company has been legally "pierced," then the corporation
shield will be disregarded and its constituent members will be held personally
liable in their own funds. (2)
(2)http://nationalparalegal.edu/public_documents/courseware_asp_files/businessLaw/
Directors&Officers/PiercingCorporateVeil.asp

--- Page 4 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
This triggered if sufficient reason for piercing occurred, such as when
'the notion of legal entity is used to deteat public convenience, Justity wrong
Protect fraud or defend crime. Some has expressed that the law will regarc
the corporation as an association of persons." (3) Others said that this is the
most litigated issue in corporate law ." (4)
The phrase "piercing the corporate veil" was described in a case in 1973
as "now fashionable". (5) In 1987, the phrase "lifting the corporate veil"
was referred to as being ""out-of-date". (6) The English courts expressly
separate the meaning of the two phrases. Staughton LJ, in Atlas Maritime
O SA v Avalon Maritime Ltd,(7) stated that: "To pierce the corporate vei
s an expression that I would reserve for treating the rights and liabilitie
or activities of a company as the rights or liabilities or activities of its
shareholders. To lift the corporate veil or look behind it, on the other hand,
should mean to have regard to the shareholding in a company for some
legal purpose." In Australia, the distinction between the meaning of the two
phrases is perhaps not as widely recognised, with courts sometimes referring
to lifting when the effect is piercing. (8)
Young J, in Pioneer Concrete Services Ltd v Yelnah Pty Ltd,(9) defined
the expression
"lifting the corporate veil" as meaning "[tlhat although
whenever each individual company is formed a separate legal personality is
created, courts will on occasions, look behind the legal personality to the
real controllers." It is important to note that courts may refer to "lifting"
or "looking beyond" the corporate veil at any time they want to examine
the operating mechanism behind a company. Although the ultimate effect
of piercing is to "look beyond the corporate veil", (10) we use the phrase
"piercing the corporate veil" in preference to the phrase "lifting the corporate
veil", in order to reinforce their separate meaning.
However, in the course of reading cases in this area you will find the
process variously described as "peeping", "penetrating", "parting", "lifting'
or piercing the veil of incorporation . (11)
(3) United States v. Milwaukee Refrigerator Transportation Co., 142 F. 247. 255 (7th Cir. 1905)
(4) Thompson, Piercing The Veil Within Corporate Groups: Corporate Shareholders As Mere
Investors, 13 Conn.J.Int'l L. 379, 383 (Spring 1999).
(5) Brewarrana v Commissioner of Highways (1973) 4 SASR 476, 480 (Bray CI).
(6) Walker v Hungerfords (1987) 44 SASR 532, 559 (Bollen ]).
(7) Atlas Maritime Co SA v Avalon Maritime Ltd (No 1) [1991] 4 AIl ER 769.
(8) See, for example, Commissioner of Land Tax v Theosophical Foundation Pry Ltd (1966) 67 SR
(NSW) 70 (NSWCA, Herron CJ, Sugerman and McLelland JJA).
(9) Pioneer Concrete Services Ltd v Yelnah Pty Ltd (1986) 5 NSWLR 254 (SCNSW, Young]).
(10) Briggs v James Hardie & Co Pty Ltd (1989) 16 NSWLR 549, 558 (Rogers AJA).
(11) Alan Dignam and John Lowry, Company Law, Oxford University Pressm 4th edition, page 30.
Volume 5 - @anoniya 7

--- Page 5 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
1.1
Types of entities conferring their members a
limited liability:
Usually, the concept of piercing the corporate veil accompanies the
"limited liability companies" or the companies that has the abbreviation of
"LLC" in some countries, where this abbreviation stands as a warning to
the third parties who may be dealing with that company that the liability of
its members is limited to their contribution in the company's capital, and
other certain types of companies. But, it is vital to say that although joint
stock companes, either public or private, do not have the abbreviation ot
"LLC" attached to them, the liability of their shareholders is also limited to
their shareholding subscription in the issued share capital of the company
in question. The concept of limitation of liability of shareholders in public
joint stock companies has had a positive impact on encouraging public
stock market investment and has boosted the concept of the initial public
offering as an indispensable source of corporate finance .(12)
In some jurisdictions, there are reasons (13) , based upon principles of
economic efficiency, can be provided for why companies are granted limited
liability .(14) Firstly, limited liability decreases the need for shareholders
(we call them partners in Bahrain) to monitor the managers of companies
in which they invest because the financial consequences of company failure
are limited. Shareholders may have neither the incentive (particularly if they
have only a small shareholding) nor the expertise to monitor the actions
of managers. The potential costs of operating companies are reduced
because limited liability makes shareholder diversification and passivity a
more rational strategy. Secondly, limited liability provides incentives for
managers to act efficiently and in the interests of shareholders by promoting
the free transfer of shares. This argument has two parts to it. The first part
is the free transfer of shares is promoted by limited liability, because, under
this principle the wealth of other shareholders is irrelevant. If a principle
of unlimited liability applied, the value of shares would be determined
partly by the wealth of shareholders. In other words, the price at which an
individual shareholder might purchase a share would be determined in part
by the wealth of that shareholder which was now at risk because of unlimited
liability. The second part of the argument is derived from the fact that if
a company is being managed inefficiently, shareholders can be expected to
be selling their shares at a discount to the price which would exist if the
company were being managed efficiently.
(12) http://www.tamimi.com/en/magazine/law-update/section6-/october2-/piercing-the-
corporate-veil-under-the-uae-companies-law-when-can-shareholders-be-responsible.html
(13) Jan M Ramsay and David B Noakes, Piercing the Corporate Veil in Australia, 19 Company
and Securities Law Journal (2001).
(14) These reasons are drawn from F Easterbrook and D Fischel, The Economic Structure of
Corporate Law, 44-41,1991.

--- Page 6 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
In the area of piercing the corporate veil in Bahrain as will be discussed
later, the law has only mentioned the Joint Stock Company, the Limited
Liability Company and the Single Person Company, the other types of
companies will be mentioned because, as seen above, they are treated in
most of their provisions with one of those three types.
Actually, the issue of single person company is getting an intense attention.
The ability to specify whether the corporate veil should be pierced could be
dithcult sometimes but of course not impossible. It we take an example -as
mentioned by some authors in other Jurisdicions- ot a detendant convicted ot
a drug trafficking offence who earns his living by a legitimate manufacturing
business which he owns and which is incorporated as a limited company. In
the absence of anything untoward relating to the company the income of the
company is not income of the defendant and so, for example, the "criminal
lifestyle assumptions" - as in some jurisdictions- cannot be applied to the
deposits into the company bank account. The Bahraini Companies Law
mentioned -expreselly- in (Article 296) in the Single Person Company the
situation that, "If the capital owner liquidates the company or suspends its
activities, in a mala fide manner, before the expiry of its term or before the
realization of its objectives he shall be liable for its obligations to the extent
of his personal property. He shall also be liable to the extent of his personal
property if he does not separate his personal interests from the interests of
the company".
If we discussed the other types of companies, it is worth mentioning that
the Bahraini Companies' Law has specified that in the General Partnership
Company in Article (35), "The Company's creditors shall have a claim on
the company's assets, and shall have also a claim on the private assets of any
partner who used to be a member of the company at the time of contracting.
All partners shall jointly be liabl towards the company's creditors, and any
agreement to the contrary shall not be valid towards third parties"
The law, to the same effect, classified the Limited Partnership Company
in the same category of the General Partnership Company, and that the
Limited Partnership By Shares Companies are treated - as per Article 249-
the same as the Joint Stock Company.
There is only one part left- excluding the "Association in participation"
company- which is the "holding company", and in accordance with Article
(304) of the Bahrain Law, it "shall be subject to the provisions regulating
the company which it has taken its form as well as its provisions set out in
this law to the extent that they do not conflict with the provisions of this
Part". Article (299) of the Law stated that: "A holding company must own
Volume 5 - anoniya 9

--- Page 7 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
more than half the capital of the affiliated company. It may take one of the
following forms:
1. A joint-stock company
ii. A limited liability company
iii. A single person company.
2. Introducing the doctrine of Piercing the Corporate Veil in Bahrain:
The doctrine of piercing the corporate veil has been endorsed in the
new amendments to the current Bahraini Commercial Companies' Law of
2001, the new amendments is effective under the Law no. (50) of 2014. This
hould be interpreted with other commercial and civil common principle
such as the principal and agent theory, direct liability for affiliate's owi
torts, interference with contracts, and fraud, taking into account that the
current law has also mentioned this doctrine to a reasonable exten, as will be
highlighted later.
Article 18bis of the new amendments outlined the circumstances for veil
piercing as follows:
Article (18bis)
The promoter (founder), partner, capital owner, the company's
nanager or the member of the board of directors in the shareholdin
ompany (oint Stock Company), closed shareholding company, limitec
liability company or single person company, as the case be, shall be liable
to the extent of all his funds for any damages that may be sustained by the
company, partners, shareholders or third parties, in any of the following
cases:
1. If he has provided false or untrue particulars about the company's
capital in its Memorandum or Articles of Association or in its dealing with
third parties, or in any of its documents, which would prejudice financial
confidence in the company.
2. If he uses the company for fraudulent or illegitimate purposes.
3. If he treats the company's funds as his own personal funds.
If he does not separate his personal interest from the company's
interest.
s. It he causes incurring obligations by the company despite the tact that
he certainly or purportedly knows that the company is not able to perform
such obligations on their maturity, or if such obligations have been incurred
due to his gross negligence or wrongdoing.
6. If he causes the company's inability to pay the taxes and fees due to
government or to public entities or organizations, and he knows certainly or
purportedly this, or if the company's inability to pay such taxes and fees is
due to his gross negligence or wrongdoing.
7. If he violates the provisions of the Law or the company's Memorandum
or Articles of Association.
10

--- Page 8 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
The Law goes on to put some other guidelines on the liability, in order
o scrutinize the situations that might surround the doubts ot vell Diercin
as follows:
b) Liability shall not be precluded if the violation has been committed
as a result, of a resolution adopted during the meeting of the board of
directors, the constituent assembly or general assembly, unless he opposed
the resolution that gave rise to the hability and recorded his objection in
the minutes of the meeting. The absence of a member from the meeting in
which the resolution was passed shall not be a reason for exemption from
liability, unless he proves his lack of knowledge of the resolution or that he
had knowledge of it but was unable to object to it.
The liability referred to in Paragraph (a) of this article shall either
be personal relating to the promoter, partner, capital owner, manager or
member of the board of directors, or joint in case of severalty of those who
committed the violation.
The above texts are self-explanatory to the meaning and guidelines
mentioned
The prongs that the Veil Piercing doctrine consists:
2.1 In the Bahraini Law:
The above mentioned seven events are the prongs of the doctrine in the
Bahraini Law, it is suggested to refer to no. 2 as per the above-mentioned
article as (fraud or facade), no. 3 as (alter ego) and no. 4 as (instrumentality),
these terminologies are being used in other jurisdictions as will be explained
later on. The other events of veil piercing could be briefed as follows:
1- Providing false or untrue information that are prejudicing the
financial confidence in the company.
2- Incurring obligations on the company while the inability to meet
them existed.
3- Mismanagement (willfully or negligently): (1) Inability to pay tax or
formal fees to a reason belongs to him/her. (2) Violating the law and/or the
Articles or Memorandum of Association.
Moreover, the Bahraini Law put additional guidelines in order to promote
the good management conduct such as the need for an explicit opposition to
the meeting's resolution where the violation was decided in. Another hurdle
is that the absence from a meeting where the violation was decided should
not stand as an excuse, because the due diligence gestures should be taken.
It is very important to mention that the above guidelines were already -to
some extents- mentioned in the current Bahrain Commercial Companies
Law of 2001 in Article 185-186 concerning the Joint Stock Company, in
which it stated that:
Article 185: "The chairman and the members of the board shall be jointly
liable before the company, the shareholders and third parties for all acts of
Volume 5 - @anoniya 11

--- Page 9 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
fraud and misuse of powers and any violation of the law or the company's
articles of association and for mismanagement. Any condition to the
contrary shall be null and void. A decision by the general assembly absolving
the board of directors of liability shall not preclude instituting action of
liability against it".
Article 186:" The liability referred to in the foregoing paragraph shall be
either personal relating to a specific member or joint for all board members.
In the last case the members shall be jointly liable for paying compensation
unless some ot them has objected to the decision causing the lability and
›ut their objection on the minutes of the meeting. The absence of a membel
from the meeting, in which the resolution was passed, shall not be a reasor
for exemption from liability unless he proves that he was unaware of the
resolution or that he was aware of it but was unable to object to it. If more
than one member commit the wrongdoing, they shall be jointly liable
towards the company. The liability actions shall be time-barred after the
elapse of five years from the date of the general assembly meeting at which
the board of directors reported on its management".
The abovementioned prongs, especially the one relating to fraud and
other deceptive manner, mismanagement and non-compliance with the
provisions of law and the required regulations as will be discussed later on
does not exclude the criminal liability. It is with due importance to mention
the enriched-examples mentioned in the Bahrain Penal Code that already
punished similar events, we can take Articles 403,404, 405 and 406. Article
403 mentioned the penalties of every bankrupt trader who caused losses
to his creditors "if his personal or domestic expenses are of an extravagant
nature. Second: if he spends substantial sums of money in gambling or in
fraudulent or speculative activities. Third: If he purchases goods for sale
below the prices thereof, borrows funds, issues financial instruments or
uses such other methods as may involve severe losses but seeking to obtain
funds with a view to delaying the adjudication of his bankruptcy. Fourth:
if he attempts, after ceasing to make payment, to satisfy debts owed to one
creditor to the detriment of all the creditors".
Article 404 mentioned the penalties of every bankrupt trader who is
leemed to be bankrupt by default in any of the following events "First: if
le enters into a contract in favor of a third party and without consideratior
offering, substantial undertakings compared with his financial position
at the time of giving such undertakings. Second: if he does not maintain
make the required stock-taking according to the Commercial Law. Third: if
he does not comply with the regulations governing the Commercial Registry.
12

--- Page 10 ---
حث باللغة الانجليزية
Fourth: if he fails to present a statement for ceasing to make payment on the
late specified for this purpose in the Commercial Law, if he fails to submi
he balance sheet or if there is proof as to the incorrectness of the detail
furnished by him after ceasing to make payment in accordance with the said
Law. Fifth: if he fails to personally appear before the Bankruptcy Judge or to
provide the details and information requested by the said judge or if such
details are found to be incorrect. Sixth: if he allows, after ceasing making
Payment, a special privilege to one of his creditors with the intent of gaining
his agreement to a settlement. Seventh: if he was declared bankrupt yet again
before fulfilling the undertakings arising from a previous settlement".
Article 405 mentioned the penalties for the commercial companies
that should be declared bankrupt and its members should be liable if "IF
they assist in the Company's cessation to make payment by making a false
announcement concerning the subscribed or paid-up capital, by publishing
an incorrect balance sheet, by distributing false dividends or by taking by
way of deceit for their account what is in excess of what they are entitled to
under the Company's Memorandum of Association".
Article 406 discusses the responsibility of the concerned persons "if
they willfully neglect the publication of the Company's Memorandum of
Association in the manner laid down by the law. Third: If they commit acts
in contravention of the Company's Articles of Association or if they ratify
and confirm such acts"
The above text-based examples could be used as a presumptions that
turns the burden of proof to the potential responsible individuals, taking
into account the definition of fraud provided in the Bahrain Civil Code of
2001, in which it mentioned in Article (90) that: "Lies or intentional silence
on the part of one of the parties as to a fact ot as to the accompanying
circumstances shall constitute fraudulent misrepresentation if it can be
proved that the contract would not have been concluded by the other party
had he had knowledge thereof".
The areas of "alter ego" and "instrumentality" that promote the possibility
of veil piercing is mentioned in the Bahrain Bankruptcy Law particularly
in Article no. 15 which stated that:"Where a petition of bankruptcy of a
company is submitted, the Court may adjudicate the bankruptcy of any
person who conduct business operations for his own account by using the
company name and disposing of the company's properties as his own'".
Holding the managers of the Limited Liability Compay's liable in their
private property is mentioned in current company law ot 200lin Article
(263) which stated that "The name of the company shall be followed by the
Phrase (with Limited liability). Such particulars shall be mentioned in all
Volume 5 - @anoniya 13

--- Page 11 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
the company's contracts, invoices, advertisements, papers and publications,
or else the company's managers shall be jointly liable to the extent of their
›rivate property towards third partes . Another examples ot 1o1nt-1ab1lit
Is alreadv mentioned with regard to the loint-Stock Companies and the
Holding Comapnies such as those mentioned in the margin (footnote). (15)
(15) Article (108) of the Company Law Law which stated that: "If a joint-stock company is incorporated
in a way incompatible with the law, any concerned party may request the company to undertake the
necessary correction within one month from the date of his request. If the company does not affect
the required correction within this period, the concerned person can claim at the High Civil Court
the nullity of the company within one year from the date of incorporation. However, the shareholders
shall not use the nullity of the company as an excuse against third parties. The company shall be
liquidated as a going concern without prejudice to the right of any concerned party to institute legal
proceedings for joint liability against the founders, the members of the first board of directors and
the first auditors". Also, Article (130)"In the case of offering new shares for public subscription, a
prospectus shall be issued containing, in particular, the following details:
1. The reasons of the capital increase.
2. The resolution of the extraordinary or the ordinary general assembly, as the case may be, authorizing
the capital increase.
3. The capital of the company at the time of issuing the new shares, the amount of the proposed
increase, the number of the new shares and the issue premium, if any.
4. A statement on the in-kind shares, if any.
5. A statement on the average profits distributed by the company during the three years preceding the
capital increase.
6. A declaration from the auditor certifying the details mentioned in the prospectus.
ii. The chairman of the board of directors and the auditor shall sign the prospectus and shall be jointly
liable for the accuracy of the details contained therein". The same applies in Article 143 in the case of
the call for public subscription for the loan bonds.
Another example is Article (115) which stated that:
"i. The shareholder shall pay the value of the shares on the due dates. Interests shall be charged for the
delay in payment once the date falls due without the need for serving a notice.
ii. If a shareholder fails to pay a due installment, the board of directors shall be entitled to sell the
share after serving a notice to the defaulting shareholder by registered mail with a delivery note.
If the shareholder does not pay the amount within ten days from the date of receiving the notice,
the company may sell the share in the Bahrain Stock Exchange or in a public auction. However, the
defaulting shareholder may pay the due installment until the date of the auction in addition to the
expenses incurred by the company.
ili. The company shall recover from the proceeds of the sale the delayed installments and expenses and
refund to the shareholder any excess amounts. If the proceeds fall short of the company's entitlements
the company shall claim the difference by using the ordinary methods". And I assume the "ordinary
methods" as mentioned earlier is to refer to the personal monies of the shareholder.
It is important also to highlight that the "holding company", in order to implement the provisions of
piercing the corporate veil, a holding company must own more than half the capital of the affiliated
company and it should be established mainly to:
i. To manage its affiliated companies or to participate in the management of other companies in which
it has shares, and to provide the necessary support for such companies.
ii. To invest its funds in shares, bonds and other securities.
iii. To own real estates and other assets necessary for undertaking its activities within the limits
permitted by law.
iv. To offer loans, guarantees and financing to its affiliated companies.
V. To own industrial property rights including Patents, trade and industrial marks, concession and
other intellectual rights, and to use and lease them to its affiliated companies or to other companies.
14

--- Page 12 ---
حث باللغة الانجليزية
Liability arising from the control of the holding
company over its subsidiaries:
The holding company must own more than half the capital of the
affiliated company. It may take one of the following forms: ( A joint-stock
company) - (A limited liability company ) - (A single person company), anc
because of that the holding company should be treated as per the form it
ame provisions of veil piercing, but the minor diffculey came if the losses,
ame provisions ot vell
errors, defaults, mistakes, mismangemnets or violations came through
the subsisdary company affiliaterd to it. This isuuse is governed by these
condiotins : (16)
1. The existence of the parent company.
2. The existence of a subsidiary company or companies where the parent
company contributes to a large proportion of the company's shares.
3. That the parent company controls the subsidiares through owning a
large percentage of its shares.
4. That the subsidiary company shall enjoy independent legal personality
from the parent company.
As mentioned above, the subsidiary company enjoys an independent
legal personality from the holding company, but this independence is only
legal and not realistic, the holding company actually manages an integrated
economic projects, and this project which it sits at the helm of it, allows
it to impose administrative and financial control over its subsidiaries, and
that is what the legal basis for the responsibility of the holding company for
the debts of the subsidiary company comes from, i.e. because it is the major
contributor to the company's capital, enabling it to appoint members of the
Board of Directors, or dismiss them, and then to control the decisions of the
board.
However, we are of the opinion that there is no need to resort to such a
justification to establish the responsibility of the holding company for the
subsidiary company' s debt; because, a holding company with subsidiaries
form an integrated economic unit combine to have all financial accounts,
especially when the company is a wholly-owned Holding Company where its
budget clearly shows that - this budget- is only a combine pool of accounts
مدى مسؤولية الشركة الأم الأجنبية عن ديون شركتها الوليدة المصرية " دراسة في بعض جوانب الإفلاس الدولي لمجموعة الشركات - (16)
تعددة الجنسيات (القسم الأول والثاني) . د. شريف محمد غنام - مجلة الحقوق- مجلس النشر العملي - جامعة الكويت - العدد الأو
الثانى - السنة السابعة والعشرون - ربيع الأخر 1424 - مارس و يونيو 003
Volume 5 - @anoniya 15

--- Page 13 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
of the holding company and its subsidiaries. This means that there is a
financial and economic integration between the holding company and its
subsidiaries. This is why some tend to say that the court may, in the case of
subsidiaries' debt, take collective action against all the companies (holding
and subsidiary companies), as one economic unit, although both of them
are an independent company, because the independent legal personality
for each of these companies is only a symbolic figure that does not exist in
Finally, it must be pointed out that the Bahraini Companies Law has
shown, clearly, the financial unity of the holding company and its subsidiaries
when it ruled in Article (303) that, "A holding company shall prepare at
the end of each financial year an aggregated balance sheet and profit and
loss accounts for it and all its affiliated companies together with the notes
and statements thereon in accordance with the international accounting
principles".
2.2 The application of such doctrine in the courts:
Most of the cases in the Kingdom of Bahrain's Cassation Court are mostly
relating to the limited liability company in which the directors (partners
or managers) will be held liable in their personal monies for their willful
or negligent actions or omission to comply with laws and regulations, and
most of them were relating to the old Commercial Company Law of 1975
(i.e. before the current Commercial Companies Law of 2001), we can take
some examples without disclosing the names of the parties as follows:
Appeal no. 32 of 1997, case no. 2/ 1988/2394/8 (17) , the Cassation Court
established that: "Managers in the limited liability company are liable to
third parties for violation of provisions of the law and the mismanagement
according to the text of articles 156, 157 and 235 of the Commercial
Companies Law 1975 on the basis of the provisions of the tort, and they
should be held personally liable for their own mistake and if they multiply,
they should be jointly held responsible in solidarity to compensate third
Prom he compang s emdran duof Association that ehe man ement tas
given to the appellant (the manager) and another partner without specifying
the authority of each of them, and that the First Instance Court's judgment
assessed the evidence based on the expert's report that the mangers of the
company did not renew its registration in the commercial register since
تاريخ الجلسة 1997-9-28 - مكتب فني 8 - رقم الجزء 1 - رقم الصفحة 17) 397)
16

--- Page 14 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
1982 and never have appointed an auditor to their accounts as requested
by the texts of the Memorandum of Association and did not submit to the
Ministry of Commerce any of the company's annual budget or an account
of profits and losses or an annual report on its activities and its financial
position as Article 243 of the Commercial Companies Law required. The
company's presence was not in the same as the registered address with the
Ministry of Commerce's records or in any other place in Bahrain, a matter
that indicates that they ceased to operate without taking action of resolve
and liquidation in accordance with the law. Therefore, their responsibility is
jointly recognized to compensate the respondent from their own personal
monies".
In another appeal no. 73 of 1991(18), the Cassation Court concluded
that: "it was originally scheduled in the law that the responsibility of the
partners in the limited liability company is limited to the extent of their
shares and that the company's creditors are not entitled to demand or
execute on their own money, but that if managers to one of the partners
alone or with others has been put in charge, it is subject to the provisions of
Article 235 of the Commercial Companies Law of 1975 which requires the
responsibility of managers in solidarity towards the company, partners and
third parties for violating the provisions of law or the Articles of Association
or mismanagement according to the rules set forth in the joint stock
company. This responsibility remains even after the dissolution as long as
those were in charge of managing directors and they should be considered as
liquidators until appointing a liquidator in accordance with the provisions
of Article 258 of the law, regardless of whether the actions that triggered the
managers to compensate constitute a crime according to the provisions of
the Penal Code and the Commercial Companies' Law"
Other example is in Appeal no. 441 of 2002 (19) in which the court stated
.The text in Article 217 of the Commercial Companies Law of 1975
that limited liability company shall have a special name ... and this name
must be followed with the phrase "limited liability company" with a capital
statement, all of this should be mentioned in all the company's contracts,
invoices, papers, communications and publications, and if all of this were
not mentioned, the managers of the company should be jointly liable in
their own money to third parties, and then the target of the capital statement
1s to protect dealers with the company, theretore, the dealers (third parties)
who benefit from the recourse to the manager's own money are only those
with good faith in order to benefit from this recourse.
تاريخ الجلسة 1992-3-8 - مكتب فني 3 - رقم الجزء 1 - رقم الصفحة 18) 66)
تاريخ الجلسة 2003-12-1 - مكتب فني 14 - رقم الصفحة 19) 653)
volume 5 - Danoniya 17

--- Page 15 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
2.3 In the English law:
After the case of Salomon, the House of Lords' opinion dominated, until
1916, where veil lifting did occur in exceptional circumstances. The cour
for example in Daimler Co Ltd v Continental Tyre and Rubber Co (Great
Britain) Ltd (1916) lifted the veil to determine whether the company was an
"enemy" during the First World War. As the shareholders were German, the
court determined that the company was indeed an enemy. (20)
In Gilford Motor Co Ltd v Horne (1933) a former employee who was
bound by a covenant not to solicit customers from his former employers set
up a company to do so. The court found that the company was but a front
for Mr. Horne and issued an injunction.
In Jones v Lipman (1962) Mr. Lipman had entered into a contract with
Mr. Jones for the sale of land. He formed a company in order to avoid the
transaction and conveyed the land to instead. He then claimed he no longer
owned the land and could not comply with the contract. The judge again
found the company was but a façade and granted an order for specific
pertormance. In Re Bugle Press (1961) majority shareholders in a company
set up a second company in order to force a compulsory purchase of a
minority shareholder's shares. The second company then made an offer for
the shares in the first company and the majority shareholders accepted. As
this meant that over 90 per cent of the shareolders had accepted it therfore
triggered a compulsory purchase of the minority sharholder's shares under
the Companies Act, • The Minority shareholder objected and the court
prevented the transaction again as the second company was but a mere
façade for the majority shareholders.
Other examples were followed in which we can conclude that there are
certain prongs in the English Law which most scholars listed them as follows:
1- Fraud, sham or façade.
2- Unity ownership (Alter Ego, the individual treated the and regarded
the corporation as his or her alter ego)
3- Unity of interest (instrumentality, using the corporation as a conduit
.hrough which he or she conducted his or her personal business)
1- Abuse of power, wrongful conduct and mismanagement (Whethel
the corporation was grossly undercapitalized; Failure to observe corporate
formalities; Non-payment of dividends; Insolvency of the debtor corporation
at the time;, Siphoning of funds of the corporation by the dominant
stockholder, non-functioning of other officers or other directors; Absence of
(20) Dignam and Lowry.
18

--- Page 16 ---
حث باللغة الانجليزية
orporate records; not holding shareholder/ director meetings to not makin
sure the officers follow anv bylaws: two shareholders owned all stock anc
shareholders behavior in lease negotiations suggested they were acting for
their behalf rather than for the corporation.
5- The Agency.(21) It was already decided in the Salomon case that if a
company acts as an agent for another party the corporate veil might be lifted.
However, the courts seem to be unwilling to determine that a principal/agent
relationship exists, especially when concerning an individual controlling
shareholder. Yet, the courts are less reluctant to imply that a principal/agent
relationship exists when the alleged agency is between a holding company
and its subsidiary, probably because in these circumstances the management
of the holding company may have a better opportunity to take advantage of
the limited liability principle.
In Adams v Cape the Court of Appeal held that the veil of incorporation
coula in essence be plerced when there was an express agency agreement, for
example, between the parent and the subsidiary company. In the absence
of such an agreement, no agency relationship can be presumed. According
to the facts of the case, the U.S. Company rendered certain services to
Cape Industries ple and even acted as its agent in relation to some specific
transactions, but this was not sufficient to constitute a general agency
agreement. Consequently, though there is no presumption of an agency
it can be implied, i.e. agency is not automatic but also not precluded. The
English Court of Appeal in Ebb Vale Urban District Council v South Wales
Traffic Area Licensing Authority considered the relationship between the
Parent and 100 per cent owned subsidiary company. It was stated that under
'the ordinary rules of law a parent company and subsidiary company, even
a hundred per cent subsidiary company, are distinct legal entities, and in
the absence of a contract of agency between the two companies one cannot
be said to be the agent of the other." According to Cohen L) this was clearly
established by Salomon v Salomon and Co Ltd. In another English case
DHN Food Distributors Ltd v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council,
the Court of Appeal, or more precisely Lord
Denning MR, always keen on lifting the corporate veil, treated a group
of companies as a single economic entity and enabled compensation for
compulsory purchase of land to be paid.
From this decision it had been said that there is "a short step" to "the
Proposition that the courts may disregard Salomon's principle whenever
(21) Anna Farat & Denis Michon, Lifting the Corporate Veil, Limited Liability of the Company
Decision-Makers Undermined? Analysis of English, U.S., German, Czech and Polish Approach.
Common Law Review. Czech.
Volume 5 - @anoniya 19

--- Page 17 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
it is just and equitable to do so." Such situations are nowadays considered
as exceptional and the verdict in the DHN case has been subject to doubt
several times since, e.g. in Woolfson v Strathclyde Regional Council and
Industrial Equity Limited and Others v Tower Hamlets. In Woolfson the
House of Lords not only distinguished the earlier decision of the Court of
Appeal in DHN but also doubted whether the Court of Appeal "properly
applied the principle that it is appropriate to pierce the corporate veil only
where special circumstances exist indicating ..… a mere façade concealing true
facts."
The different judicial approaches to the question of whether a company
has acted as an agent make it dithcult to rationalise the judgments. In The
Electric Light and Power Supply Corporation Limited v Cormack(22), Rich
AJ refused to pierce the veil of a one-man company. The defendant had
ontracted with the plaintifts to use theit power supply for his works for twe
vears, and not to install any other form of motive power during that period.
During the two-year period, the defendant sold his works to a company of
which he was the manager and shareholder. The new company then installed
motive power other than that supplied by the plaintiffs. Rich Aj refused to
find that the defendant had breached the contract, viewing it as a personal
undertaking. Rich AJ held that "tlhese acts are in fact being done, not by
the defendant personally, but by him as agent for A.W. Cormack Ltd., which
even if a "one-man company" is a different entity." Rich AJ found no evidence
that the sale of the business by the defendant was done with the object of
evading his personal obligations.
According to some jurists, the current position of English Courts is
that, it is important to mention that the creditors are, inter alia, protected
by numerous statutory provisions concerning the lifting of the corporate
veil. The Parliament is always authorized to enact exceptions to the Salomon
principle and has done so several times. The courts, therefore, have to accept
that even though the principle of separate legal entity may cause injustice,
unless the Parliament in its Act provides so, the court should not interfere
A crucial exception enacted by the UK Parliament is Section 213 of the 1986
Insolvency Act. Accordingly, the creditors are protected where the business
of the company has been carried out to defraud them, and the courts on a
winding-up are entitled to look behind the corporate veil in such a case.
(22) The Electric Light and Power Supply Corporation Limited v Cormack (1911) 11 NSWSR 350
(SCNSW, Rich AJ).
20

--- Page 18 ---
shareholder for the company's debts. He also states that "in rare instances
the courts will look to the substance rather than the form to deny benefits
of corporate status which they think should not be enjoyed." He goes on
contemplating that it is difficult to predict when the courts will do so,
however, the judges' subjective perception of fairness or policy might be a
useful guide.
It has also been presented that the notion that "the judges are increasingly
prepared to disregard the autonomous personality of companies to facilitate
the legitimate interests and expectations of those who come in contact with
them, is clearly ' overstatement' of the position."
2.3.1 Principles governing veil piercing in English case
law:
The below principles might work as guidance to the courts in deciding,
whether the circumstances of a particular case, justifies the piercing of the
corporate veil.
In VTB Capital ple v. Nutritek International Corp & Others, the High
ourt held that it was not appropriate to pierce the corporate veil and
llow contractual claims to proceed against the defendants, who were no
contracting parties to the loan agreement, i.e., the puppeteer could not be
Placed into the puppet' s contract. . The facts are set out below.
VTB entered into a loan agreement with a third party (RAP) in order
to fund the acquisition of various dairy companies from Nutritek. RAP
subsequently defaulted on the loan. VTB alleged that it had been induced
to enter into the loan agreement by fraudulent misrepresentations made
by Nutritek as to Nutritek's control of RAP and the value of the dairy
companies. After entering into the loan agreement, VTB discovered that RAP
and Nutritek were under common control and, therefore, the transaction
was not 'at arm's length'. VTB initially pleaded causes of action against the
defendants in deceit and unlawful means conspiracy, but later applied to
amend its particulars of claim in order to bring a contractual claim against
the second, third and fourth defendants. VTB's application was refused
On appeal, the Court of Appeal upheld the decision of the High Court;
it was not open to the English courts to hold, once the corporate veil has
been pierced, that a puppeteer was a party to a puppet company's contract.
The Court of Appeal also used the opportunity to re-state and clarify the
Volume 5 - @anoniya 21

--- Page 19 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
general principles a court should apply when deciding whether to pierce the
corporate veil (23):
1. Ownership and control of a company are not of themselves sufficient
to justify piercing the veil
2. The court cannot pierce the corporate veil, even when no unconnected
third party is involved, merely because it is perceived that to do so is necessary
in the interests of justice
3. The corporate veil can only be pierced when there is some impropriet,
4. The company's involvement in an impropriety will not by itself justify
a piercing of its veil: the impropriety "must be linked to use of the company
structure to avoid or conceal liability"
5. It follows that if the court is to pierce the veil, it is necessary to show
both control of the company by the wrongdoer and impropriety in the sense
of a misuse of the company as a device or façade to conceal wrongdoing
6. A company can be a façade for such purposes even though not
incorporated with deceptive intent; "the question is whether it is being used
as a façade at the time of the relevant transaction(s)"
7. A piercing of the corporate veil will not be available only if there is
no other remedy available against the wrongdoers for the wrong they have
committed.
In the case of Prest -v- Petrodel Resources Limited Lord Sumption, in
delivering the leading judgment, concluded that the corporate veil could,
absent any statutory provision, only be pierced when "a person is under an
existing legal obligation or liability or subject to an existing legal restriction
which he deliberately evades or whose enforcement he deliberately frustrates
by interposing a company under his control" and only then for the purpose
of "depriving the company or its controller of the advantage that they would
otherwise have obtained by the company's separate legal personality". Lord
Sumption described the principle of piercing the corporate veil as a limited
one because "in almost every case where the test is satisfied the facts will ......
disclose a legal relationship between the company and its controller which
will make it unnecessary to pierce the corporate veil."
In conducting a lengthy review of the authorities Lord Sumption
distinguished between cases that applied what he termed the "concealment
principle" and the "evasion principle"
. The concealment principle does
1ot 1nvolve
ro Conceal the identity of the real etons will norp deter the courts Fron)
identifying them, assuming that their identity is legally relevant. The court
in that situation is not disregarding the "facade", but only looking behind it
(23) Latham and Watkins, In Practice, Janine Perkins, The London Dispute Newsletter, October
.2012
22

--- Page 20 ---
to discover the facts which the corporate structure is concealing. This could
De done tor instance by applying the laws ot trust or agency. The evasior
principle is different in that it entitles a court to disregard the corporate
veil "if there is a legal right against the person in control of it which exists
independently of the company's involvement and a company is interposed
so that the separate legal personality of the company would defeat the right
or frustrate its enforcement".
However, there were differences of opinion in Petrodel amongst the seven
Justices. Lord Walker expressed doubts over the doctrine's existence. Lady
Hale (with whom Lord Wilson agrees) was uncertain whether all previous
cases come within Lord Sumption's formulation. At the other end of the
spectrum Lords Mance and Clarke leaved open the possibility of piercing the
corporate veil in circumstances beyond those envisaged by Lord Sumption
Lord Neuberger agrees with Lord Sumption but added his own analysis to
his judgment.
What seemd clear, however, was that the majority of the Supreme Court
acknowledge, albeit obiter, the existence of the doctrine of piercing the
corporate veil and that it extends at least as far as the test formulated by
Lord Sumption.
Criminal side of piercing in English Law:
In English criminal law there have been cases in which the courts have
been prepared to pierce the veil of incorporation. For example in confiscation
proceedings under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 monies received by a
company can, depending upon the particular facts of the case as found by the
court, be regarded as having been 'obtained' by an individual (who is usually,
but not always, a director of the company). In consequence those monies
may become an element in the individual's 'benefit' obtained from criminal
conduct (and hence subject to confiscation from him)(24) . The position
regarding 'piercing the veil' in English criminal law was given in the Court
of Appeal judgment in the case of R v Seager(25) in which the court said:
There was no major disagreement between counsel on the legal principles
by reference to which a court is entitled to "pierce" or "rend" or "remove"
the "corporate veil". It is "hornbook" law that a duly formed and registered
company 1s a separate legal entity from those who are its shareholders and it
has rights and liabilities that are separate from its shareholders. A court can
"pierce" the carapace of the corporate entity and look at what lies behind it
(24) David Winch, "Confiscation: lifting the veil of incorporation" (2013)
(25) http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Crim/2009/1303.html
Volume 5 - @anoniya 23

--- Page 21 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
only in certain circumstances. It cannot do so simply because it considers it
might be just to do so. Each of these circumstances involves impropriety and
dishonestv. The court will then be entitled to look for the legal substance,
not the just the form. In the context of criminal cases the courts have
identified at least three situations when the corporate veil can be pierced
First if an offender attempts to shelter behind a corporate façade, or veil to
hide his crime and his benefits from it. Second, where an offender does acts
in the name of a company which (with the necessary mens rea) constitute
a criminal offence which leads to the offender's conviction, then "the veil
of incorporation is not so much pierced as rudely torn away": per Lord
Bingham in Jennings v CPS, Paragraph. Thiraly, where the transaction or
business structures constitute a "device", "cloak" or "sham", i.e. an attempt
to disguise the true nature of the transaction or structure so as to deceive
third parties or the courts.
2.4 In the US Laws:
The doctrine of lifting the corporate veil (in the US mostly under the
name of "piercing the corporate veil" or "disregard of legal entity") has its
true origins in the American law and - in contrast to Europe - it is considered
there to be a normal part of the legal system. Whereas European judges, not
excluding the English ones, rather caretully reach a conclusion to dislodge
the separate legal entity of the company, their American colleagues hand
down rulings in favour of creditors, apparently without much doubt. If one
realizes that apart from Texas there are no statutory examples of restrictions
regarding the institution of piercing the corporate veil, it remains apparent
what a great deal of responsibility they shoulder.
The maxim that a company is a separate legal entity distinct from its
members was established in the USA even earlier than in the UK in the
case of Bank of Augusta v. Earle (1839). Attempts to disregard the separate
entity preserve a close link to equity. This may be the reason for which in
the United States the piercing of the corporate veil has been equated to a
lightning: "it's rare, severe and unprincipled." One can say that every factual
state develops its own set of elements that should be taken into account.
Traditional tests aim to prevent fraud and achieve equity. For the reason of
clarity some authors have tried to provide a viable alternative to the rather
changeable combination of facts and proposed using the term "the totality of
circumstances rule". Notwithstanding how practical it seems in the debates,
it remains still a blanket term and is just a better name of saying that the
doctrine of piercing the veil is based on different elements adiudicated ad
casu. In fact, much is dependent on the judge and what he/she considers an
equitable result. Consequently, the outcomes of similar cases may diverge.
24

--- Page 22 ---
The U.S. courts lft the company' s immunity in a varety of situations.
The piercing concept does not come from the laws of the states or federal
government but it is a judicial creation which varies from state to state. The
scope of abuses relating to groups of companies is the most popular reason
for which the courts disregard the separate entity principle. If a controlled
company is organized as a mere tool in the hands of a parent enterprise
and the separateness of the two corporations has ceased (instrumentality
rule), one can assume that holding only the subsidiary corporation liable
for any damages resulting from fraud or dishonesty of the parent company
would result in injustice. Similar conclusion can be drawn under the alter
ego doctrine which is also demonstrated by showing a blending of identities
between two corporations and thus, in practice, it is difficult to distinguish
them.
Courts primarily rely on two tests to determine the circumstances under
which to pierce the corporate veil. Under these tests, both the elements and
standards of proof are fairly consistent(26). The "alter ego" test is equitable
in nature and pierces the corporate veil in situations where fraud, illegality,
nr in junsiru mentabie a pist, dn t e bther handCeds ites d showdine tat che
controlling shareholder exercised "extensive controls over the acts of the
entity giving rise to the claim of wrongdoing." Regardless of the test used,
the determination of piercing the corporate veil is a fact-intensive issue and
is typically decided by a jury.(28)
The fact-intensive nature of these two tests leads to an extensive
verlap of factors, v
(26)
114 AM. JUR. PROOF OF FACTS 3d 403, §6; see White v. Winchester Land Dev. Corp., 584
S.WW.2d 56, 61-63 (Ky. Ct. App. 1979) (examining the instrumentality theory and the alter ego theory);
see also House of Koscot Dev. Corp. v. Am. Line Cosmetics, Inc., 468 F.2d 64, 67 (5th Cir. 1972)
(appearing to use the two theories interchangeably); see also FMC Fin. Corp. v. Murphree, 632 F.2d
413, 422 (5th Cir. 1980) (explaining that it is "inappropriate to attempt to apply any verbalization of
the test in a mechanical manner").
(27) John H. Matheson, The Limits of Business Limited Liability: Entity Veil Piercing and Successor
Liability Doctrines, 31 WM. MITCHELL L. REV. 411, 420 n.28 (2005) (citing Richard v. Bell Atl. Corp.,
946 F. Supp. 54, 61 (D.D.C. 1996)).
(28) Johnson & Johnson Consumer Cos., Inc. v. Aini, No. 02-CV-6624 (DLI, 2009 WL 6055841, at *7
(E.D.N.Y. Dec. 1, 2009) (citing Carte Blanche PTE., Ltd. v. Diner Club Int'1, Inc., 758 F. Supp. 908,914
(S.D.N.Y. 1991)); see also Fulgini Orilio & F.LLI S.p.A v. Letttieri, No. 05 Civ. 3718(SMG), 2007 WL
1834750, at *3 (E.D.N.Y. June 26,
(29) See 114 AM. JUR. PROOF OF FACTS 3d 403, § 1 ("In piercing the corporate veil, the courts
frequently employ terms such as 'alter ego,' 'instrumentality,' and 'sham,' but the use of such words
in judicial opinions is of little help to the practitioner, such labels serve as shorthand for a conclusion
but provide no guidance as to what factors were considered in reaching that conclusion."); Frank H.
Easterbrook & Daniel R. Fischel, Limited Liability and the Corporation, 52 U. CHI. L. REV. 89, 89
(1985) ("There is a consensus that the whole area of limited liability, and conversely of piercing the
corporate veil, is among the most confusing in corporate law."); see also AE Rests. Assocs., LLC v.
Giampietro (In re Giampietro), 317 B.R. 841, 846 (Bankr. D. Nev. 2004).
Volume 5 - @anoniya 25

--- Page 23 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
require proof of a unity of interest between the individual and entity and an
inequitable result would follow as a consequence." (30) Some jurisdictions
add a third element, "proximate cause", which requires that the underlying
control and breach of duty "proximately cause the injury or unjust loss
complained of ...." (31)
In the coming paragraphs we will give briet reviewing of the need for
such a doctrine and a glanced view of its prerequisite application.
Reverse Piercing under US Laws:
Under the US Laws, in some instances, parties may seek to "reverse
pierce". "Reverse Pierce' treats the assets of the LLC as owned by the member
in order to avoid fraud on creditors.
The term "reverse piercing" the corporate veil refers to a doctrine
whereby courts disregard the corporation as an entity separate from one of
its shareholders. In this sense, reverse piercing is similar to the more familiar
loctrine of plercing the corporate veil. The difterence is that in regular,
"forward" veil piercing, a creditor of the corporation is typically attempting
to hold a shareholder personally liable for debts of the corporation, whereas
in reverse piercing a creditor of the shareholder is typically trying to hold the
corporation liable for debts of the shareholder.
One might wonder why reverse piercing is necessary. The creditor of a
shareholder can already indirectly reach the corporation's assets because the
creditor can reach the shareholder's stock, which could be sold to pay the
laim. I'he answer 1s complex because reverse plercing arises in more varle
ontexts than traditiona
veil piercing. Under some statutes it might be
advantageous to treat the assets of a corporation as assets of the shareholder.
In other contexts, it might simply be easier to bypass the two-step process of
proceeding against the stock and then dissolving the corporation or selling
the stock.
Examples:
C. F Trust, Inc. v. First Flight LTD Partnership, (Va. 2001) - The Virginia
court permitted reverse piercing of the corporate veil where a judgment
debtor used his limited partnership interest to evade creditors. The court
was persuaded by the fact that the debtor maintained control over the
(30) 114 AM. JUR. PROOF OF FACTS 3d 403, § 6; Trustees of the Graphic Commc'ns Intern. Union
Upper Midwest Local 1M Health & Welfare Plan v. Bjorkedal, 516 F.3d 719, 728-29 (8th Cir. 2008);
Troyk v. Farmers Grp., Inc., 90 Cal. Rptr.3d 589, 619 (Ct. App. 2009).
(31) Davenport v. Quinn, 730 A.2d 1184, 1196 (Conn. App. Ct. 1990); see also E. Market St. Square,
Inc. v. Tycorp Pizza IV, Inc., 625 S.E.2d 191, 196 (N.C. Ct. App. 2006).
26

--- Page 24 ---
partnership and its distributions despite official transfer of control and
ownership to another person, and the debtor siphoned business assets for
his own personal use and without a business purpose.
In re Phillips, (Colo.2006) - The court stated that Colorado law allows
reverse piercing of the corporate veil when justice requires. Mallard
Automotive Group, Ltd. V. Le Clair Management Corp., (D. Nev. 2001)- The
Nevada court held that a party seeking to hold a corporation responsible
for an individual's debt under reverse piercing does not have to prove that
the corporate form was disregarded. Litchfield Asset Management Corp. v.
Howell, (Conn. App.2002) - The Connecticut court found the evidence was
sufhcient to disregard the corporate form and hold limited liability company
responsible for the debtor's personal debt where the debtor used company
funds to pay for the debtor's personal expenses and used corporate funds
as her own; the corporation did not pay her a salary but paid her expenses
directly, the debtor owned 97 percent of the stock and all of the stock of
the second corporation; and both companies operated outside of the same
office space over the debtor's garage.
State Bank of Eden Valley v. Euerle Farms, Inc., it was held that the family
farm was the alter ego of its occupants and the corporate veil was properly
reverse pierced to reach property. LFC Marketing Group. Inc. v. Loomis, (Nev.
2000)- The Nevada court listed reverse piercing cases and found use of the
doctrine was appropriate where a corporation is being used to hide assets or
secretly conduct business to avoid pre-existing liability of controlling debtor.
In any case, reverse piercing is controversial. The doctrine is problematic
when the relevant corporation has multiple shareholders, and even when there
is only one shareholder it can give creditors of a shareholder an advantage
they would not normally have relative to creditors of the corporation. As
a result, reverse piercing is less universally recognized than traditional veil
piercing, not having been accepted in all state courts .(32)
3. The need for corporate veil piercing:
We reached the idea that this corporate rule represents, in some judicial
cases, a principle of fairness and justice and acts as an alarm to the owners,
shareholders, directors and others that certain cases of liability may be
initiated by creditors and tort claimants against them. This means creditors
can go after the owners' home, bank account, investments, and other assets
to satisfy the corporate debt.
(32) http://witnesseth.typepad.com/blog/reverse-piercing.html
Volume 5 - @anoniya 27

--- Page 25 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
The doctrine of corporate veil piercing matters because of the need to
achieve these goals of:
Corporate structure presumptively respected
Establish the suitable jurisdiction
Establish liability
• Expand pool of recoverable assets
• Facilitate discovery of truth and the real operations behind the
company
In the UK, the taxation authorities have been actually aware of the
otential for group structure to avoid taxation by moving assets an
iabilities around the group Thus there are numerous examples of taxatio
legislation directed at ignoring the separate entities in the group.
The need for this famous section of law goes beyond the pure corporate
diputes to the disputes between individuals or corporate persons and the
state as a sovereign body, for example if a company sat up a corporation or
a structure of group of companies in order to evade the enforcement of one
or more of its then existing liabilities, it remains forever so pierced to the
advantage of every other third party creditor thereafter. We can take example
of the Republic of Congo in the case of (Kensington International Limited
V. Republic of Congo).
In Kensington International Limited -v- Republic of the Congo
(November 2005), the Congo attempted to avoid its debts by trading
oil through a network of companies. These companies and the relevant
transactions were found to be shams. In such circumstances, the court could
pierce the corporate veil.
Background
Cotrade SA (a wholly-owned subsidiary of SNPC (see above)) entered
into a contract with Africa Oil & Gas Corporation (AOGC) for the sale of
oil. AOGC sold the oil to Sphynx (BDA) Limited (Sphynx). Sphynx then sold
the oil to Glencore Energy UK Limited (Glencore).
Kensington sought an order that Glencore pay to Kensington the monies
Glencore owed to Sphynx on the basis that receipt of money by Sphynx
vould, in reality, be receipt by the Congo. The court should therefore pierc
he corporate veil and treat Glencore's debt to Sphvnx as a debt which was
in reality, due to the Congo. The court agreed.
• The law
In his judgment Mr Justice Cooke summarised the principles of law
relating to sham contracts. The following propositions are worth noting:
28

--- Page 26 ---
o to justify the court "piercing the corporate veil", an element of
Impropriety or dishonesty will be required
• a "sham" agreement is one where the parties do not honour the right:
and obligations which are set out in the agreement. It serves as a smokescreen
as to the true nature of their contractual relations. In reality, the agreement
is not effective;
o the transfer of assets (even if not at an undervalue) so as to divest
a company of those assets for the purpose of ensuring they would not be
available to meet existing habilities may justity piercing the corporate veil;
o a court will look for the substance of a matter and, in doing so, will
look for the legal substance rather than its economic substance, if different;
and
creaced in order ta evade righes b reliet which chird parties might, in hc
future, acquire. The corporate structure could legitimately be used so as to
ensure that the legal liability (if any) in respect of particular future activities
of the group (and, correspondingly, the risk of enforcement of that liability,
would fall on a particular member of the group, rather than upon its parent
Or associated companies.
The court's decision
SNPC and Cotrade were part of the state and had no independent
existence. Debts owed to either of them were debts owed to the Congo. The
transactions in question were all held to be shams, and therefore third party
debt orders for the purchase price of the relevant cargo of oil were made.
General C SNPE and" a special 'viser ro che President of the congo,
used AOGC's name and bank account for the sales by SNPC and Cotrade,
disregarding the corporate personality, organisation or interests of AOGC
and without the knowledge of anyone else at AOGC. The same position
applied to Sphynx. Very little money passed through its bank account and,
with regard to the cargo at issue, the monies were remitted direct trom
Sphynx's purchaser into the AOGC account from which Cotrade was paid.
Mr Gokana had made all the arrangements between AOGC and Sphynx;
they were not at arm's length. He also indirectly controlled the contractual
documents between AOGC and Cotrade. The documents were of a
"shambolic nature", which rather gave the game away and illustrated the
sham nature of the transaction.
3.1 A question to be raised: What is the Auditors' responsibility?
Some may raise the question that the company law shall not have
provisions of piercing the veil because it might be better to blame the
Volume 5 - @anoniya 29

--- Page 27 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
auditors in any matter of fraud or commingling of assets or other potential
situations.
However, small corporations are less likely than their larger counterparts
to observe corporate formalities, which makes them more vulnerable to
a plercing of their corporate veil, we mean by formalities: holding annual
detailegs of directors and shareholders or members, keeping accurate,
. records (called "minutes") of important decisions that are made at
the meetings, adopting company bylaws, and making sure that officers and
agents abide by those bylaws.
The case of the Stone & Rolls Ltd v Moore Stephens [2009] UKHL is a
leading case relevant for the English company law and the law on fraud and
ex turpi causa non oritur action (Latin expression that stands for: "from a
dishonorable cause an action does not arise") a legal doctrine which states
that a plaintiff will be unable to pursue legal remedy if it arises in connection
with his own illegal act. The House of Lords decided by a majority of three
to two that where the director and sole shareholder of a closely held private
company deceived the auditors with fraud carried out on all creditors,
subsequently the creditors of the insolvent company would be barred from
suing the auditors for negligence from the shoes of the company. The Lords
reasoned that where the company was only identihable with one person, the
fraud of that person would be attributable to the company, and the "company"
(or the creditors standing in its insolvent shoes) could not rely on its own
illegal fraud when bringing a claim for negligence against any auditors. The
facts were: Stone Rolls Limited ("Company") wholly owned and directed
by Stojevic ("S'). Moore Stephens were auditors who performed Audits
foray an falsifed accounts 10 sho more protrable transactions than the
actual case. In previous litigation, a Czech bank successfully sued Company
and S. Company went into liquidation. Company's creditors acting in
company's name sued Auditors for failing to detect fraud, they claimed USD
174million. Moore Stephens argued that if they were negligent, it would be
contrary to public policy to let Company sue them. Based on principle that
-laimant cannot come to court to make a plea while replying on his own
illegal behavior, (Doctrine of " Ex Turpi Causa Non Oritur Actio" , the High
Court decided S's action and state of mind were attributed to the Company
Auditors had a duty to detect fraud, it was the very thing they were engaged
to do. Court of Appeal held that Auditors could rely on defence of Ex Turpi
Cause. The House of Lords held that Auditors could rely on defense to
prevent the Company's claim for negligence. S was the exclusive owner and
controller and S's fraudulent intentions were attributed to the Company, as
fraudulent acts done for Company's benefit and the company deemed to be
aware of S's fraud. Auditors owed a duty to perform theit audit diligently to
30

--- Page 28 ---
the Company (not to individual shareholder/creditors), if the company tried
to bring a claim for breach of Auditor's duty, Company would be relying on
its illegality.
In Bahrain, the auditors have their own unique role, which is already
mentioned in the Decree Law no. 26 of 1996 concerning the Auditors in
which Article (25) has stated clearly that: "The owner of the auditing
office shall be responsible for compensation of damage to the customer or
third parties caused by gross negligence and professional errors occurred
luring the performance of the office's work, and in the case of multiple
uditing offices, the owners should collectively be responsible in solidaritv
of compensation. The owner of the auditing office must arrange insurance
cover to cope with this responsibility".
Also the Bahraini Company Law of 2001 has many articles that deals
with this issue such as Article 220 which concerns the joint-stock company's
auditor, it stated that:" "The auditor shall be responsible for the accuracy
of the details included in his report in his capacity as the representative of
all the shareholders, and each shareholder shall have the right to discuss,
at the meeting of the general assembly, the report of the auditor and seek
clarifications on its contents. The auditor shall be liable towards the company
for any damages sustained by the company as a result of his mistakes. If the
company has more than one auditor and they were involved in the mistake
they shall become Jointly hable towards the company. The civil lability
action referred to in the foregoing paragraph shall be barred after the lapse
of one year from the date of the general assembly meeting at which the
auditor's report was read. If the act attributed to the auditor constitutes
a crime, the civil liability action shall not lapse except with the lapse of the
general action. The auditor shall also be liable to pay compensation for any
damage that may be sustained by any bona fide shareholder or third parties
as a result of his professional error or of not complying with the accounting
principles and standards"
It is important to mention that in October 2015, the amendment to the
law - ( Decree Law no. 28 of 2015) has replaced Article 286-c and Article 361-
d to reflect the following:
"The managers, from one side, and the auditors form the other side, shall
forward to the ministry of commerce - within six months from the end of
the fiscal year- a copy of the balance sheet, the profit and loss account, the
annual report and the signed and stamped auditor's report regarding the
financial position of the company in according with the model created by
the ministry. And in case the loss of the company exceeded half of its capital,
the managers and the auditor should submit to the ministry a copy of the
signed and stamped auditor's report. In all cases, the ministry may request
Volume 5 - Danoniya 31

--- Page 29 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
any financial data, documents, reports or additional information that it sees
necessary".
Article 361-d: Without prejudice to any severer penalty provided for in
the Penal Code or in any other law, imprisonment and a fine not less than
five thousands Bahraini Dinars and not exceeding ten thousands Bahraini
Dinars or either of these two penalties shall be imposed on:
"Each board member, director or auditor participated in the preparation
or adoption of the budget or sent to the ministry letter in accordance with the
provisions of paragraph (c) of Article (286) of this law in a way that does not
etlect properly the truth about the hnancial position of the company or al
1ccount of profits and losses that does not reflect properly all the company'
profits ot losses for the fiscal year, or does not send to the ministry any of the
financial statements, documents, reports, or letters required in accordance
with the provisions of paragraph (c) of Article (286) of this law".
3.2 Directors and Officers Liability Insurance, does it
stand?
In Bahrain, we mentioned a closer link to insurance of professional
liability in the aforementioned Article (25) of the Auditors Law, in which
it stated that: "The owner of the auditing office shall be responsible for
compensation of damage to the customer or third parties caused by gross
negligence and professional errors occurred during the performance of the
office's work, and in the case of multiple auditing offices, the owners should
collectively be responsible in solidarity of compensation. The owner of the
auditing office must arrange insurance cover to cope with this responsibility".
In the United States, Canada, England and Wales, and Australia,
directors and officers insurance is provided so that competent professionals
can serve as supervisors of organizations without fear of personal financial
loss. Directors are typically not managing the day-to-day operations of the
organization and therefore cannot ensure that the organization will be
successful; further, business is inherently risky. Thus the "business iudgment
rule" has developed to shield directors in most instances, i.e. the "directors of
, corporation . . . are clothed with the presumption, which the law accord
o them, of being motivated in their conduct by a bona fide regard for th
interests of the corporation whose affairs the stockholders have committed
to their charge" . (33)
(33) Gimbel v. Signal Cos., 316 A.2d 599, 608 (Del. Ch. 1974).
32

--- Page 30 ---
However, insuring negligence in supervising organizations, or wrongful
acts and misrepresentation in financial statements is controversial due to
its effect on accountability. In the United States, corporate boards have a
"duty of care", but if personal financial consequences for violating that duty
of care are lacking, the boards may not perform proper due diligence. In the
famous case of Smith v. Van Gorkom (1985), the Delaware Supreme Court
found a board grossly negligent and therefore liable. The decision created a
backlash and a statute change in Delaware which allowed a corporation to
amend its charter to eliminate directors'
che ruty of Careea version of chis statute has been passed in all states, and
most large corporations have such an "exculpatory clause" .(34)
In some cases scholars propose that the risk of personal liability for
corporate officers be increased . (35)
The types of claims are dependent upon the nature of the company.
Directors and officers of a corporation may be liable if they damage the
corporation in breach of their legal duty, mix personal and business assets,
or fail to disclose conflicts of interest. State law may protect the directors
and officers from liability (particularly exculpatory provisions under state
law relating to directors). Even innocent errors in judgment by executives
may precipitate claims.
The types of claims are dependent upon the nature of the corporation.
'or public companes, claims are primarily due to lawsuits by shareholder
fter financial difficulties, with a 2011 Towers Watson survev finding tha
69% of publicly traded companies had claimed for a shareholder lawsuit
n the past 10 years as opposed to 217 ot private companes .(36) Othe
laims arise from shareholder-derivative actions, creditors (particularlv afte
entering the zone of insolvency), customers, regulators (including those that
would bring civil and criminal charges), and competitors (for anti-trust or
unfair trade practice allegations). For nonprofits, claims are typically related
to employment practice and less commonly regulatory or other fiduciar
laims .(37) For private companies, claims are often from competitors o1
(34) Drury LL. (2007). What's the Cost of a Free Pass? A Call for the Re-Assessment of Statutes that
Allow for the Elimination of Personal Liability for Directors. Tennessee Journal Business Law.
(35) Sharfman B. (2008). The Enduring Legacy of Smith v. Van Gorkom. 33 Del. J. Corp. L.
(36) Directors and Officers Liability: 2011 Survey of Insurance Purchasing Trends. Towers Watson.
https://www.towerswatson.com/en/Insights/IC-Types/Survey-Research-Results/2012/03/Directors-
and-Officers-Liability-2011-Survey-of-Insurance-Purchasing-Trends
(37) D&O Insurance Overview. Boundas, Skarzynski, Walsh & Black LLC.
http://www.bswb.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/DO_Public_vs_Private2.pdf
Volume 5 - @anoniya 33

--- Page 31 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
customers for antitrust or deceptive business practices (38) and one survey
of 451 executives found that lawsuits cost an average of USD 308,475 .(39)
ne relativelv neglected area is the personal labilitv to non-shareholdel
lat directors mav tace due to torts committed as a result ot negliger
supervision .(40)
However, intentional illegal acts or illegal profits are typically not covered
under Directors and Officers insurance policies; coverage would only extend
to "wrongful acts" as defined under the policy, which may include certain
acts, omissions, misstatements while acting for the organization.
Due to exclusions and as a matter of public policy, coverage is not
provided for criminal fraud. Therefore, a company may not indemnify a
director against lability arising from
willful misconduct or breach of trust by the director.
the director acting without the necessary authority
reckless trading or fraudulent acts of the director
a fine related to an offence committed by the director unless the fine
was based on strict liability. (There are limited exceptions to the prohibition
on payment of fines.(
.4
The Corporate Veil Piercing in International
Arbitration:
We mentioned before the difficulty of bringing in the parties that have
not signed an arbitration agreement. These could be parent companies,
subsidiaries, private individuals, governmental and quasigovernmental
entities, and states.
Generally, arbitrators distinguish between "consenting non-signatories"
to arbitration agreements that seek to arbitrate, and
"non-consenting
non-signatories" that resist arbitration . (41) The tribunals that join
Compny Dencrally ch-ng: iliam E, khepper ad An ailey, hia bitey or Corporate tficers aind
Directors (4th Edition).
anagement: Exploring the Intersection Of Corporate and Tort Lan. American Universior La
anagement: Exploring the Intersection Of C
Review.
(40) Stadermann F, Banis C. (2008). From 'Severability Clause' to 'Innocent Directors Clause' in
Dutch D&O Policies. British Insurance Law Association.
(41) See William W. Park, Non-Signatories and the New York Convention, 2 J. DISP. RESOL. INT'L
.(84,105 (2008
34

--- Page 32 ---
non-signatories rely either on implied consent or disregard of corporate
ersonality (42). There is no clear line between these two justifications
1owever, as tribunals otten plerce the corporate vell as a means to entorc
the parties' original intent.
One of the most well-known examples of piercing the corporate veil for
the benefit of consenting non-signatories is the Dow Chemical International
Chamber of Commerce arbitration .(43) In that case, the tribunal allowed
parent companies to be claimants despite the fact that the arbitration
clauses were between the defendant and subsidiary companies of the same
Parent group.
The tribunal relied on "the common intent of the parties . . . such as
it appears from the circumstances that surround the conclusion and
characterize the performance and later the termination of contracts." The
tribunal also followed "usages conforming to the needs of international
commerce, in particular in the presence of group of companies.' 33
According to the single entity theory applied by the tribunal, "lal group of
companies, despite the legal status of each of the companies, represents a
single economic reality which the arbitral tribunal must take into account
when ruling on its jurisdiction."
However, application of the "group of companies" doctrine remains
uncommon. Some authorities suggest only one out of every four cases that
purport to apply the "group of companies" doctrine did actually extend
lurisdiction over nonsignatores.
When it comes to arbitration under bilateral investment treaties, the legal
regime is somewhat different. It has been suggested that the rules relevant
to shareholder claims under investment protection treaties need to be
regarded as lex specialis as established by specific treaties. This is so despite
the fact that, under the national law of most jurisdictions, shareholders are
not allowed to bring claims on behalf of the company in which they own
shares. The inclusion of shareholdings into the definition of investment in
a bilateral investment treaty would normally result in piercing the corporate
veil for the benefit of the shareholder.
(42) Piercing the corporate veil in International Arbitration, Yaraslau Kryvoi Ph.D., Cleveland State
university Engages Scholarship @CSU, The Global Business Law Review, Law Journals, 2011.
(43) Id. at 103 (citing Dow Chemical v. Isover St. Gobain, ICC Case No. 4131, 1983 J. Dr. Int'1899
.((1932)
Volume 5 - @anoniya 35

--- Page 33 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
It is not enough to persuade the tribunal to pierce the corporate veil
under applicable law. The enforcement of awards piercing the corporate veil
creates additional problems, which is out of our scope in this stage.
Concluding remarks:
It is very important to promote Bahrain as an attractive investment
environment, and these investments should be cautious and serious where
risks could be inherent in such company structure in some unforeseen or
deliberate consequences. As long as Bahrain represents a recipient country
for foreign direct investment, a well-dehined doctrine of veil piercing is
essential to focus on - for example- that the shareholder in any form of
companies especially the Limited Liability ones is no longer immune from
responsibility at the expense of creditors or tort victims.
A courts' reluctant (or we can call it the conservative/adamant) approach
has been proved - by juristic or cases in the English and American Jurisdictions
-where the challenge is whether the corporate veil has to be pierced or not
and on what circumstances. Some noticed that, the degree of this reluctance
varied, as it becomes with very slow motive in public companies rather than
the small and medium sized companies or companies with single individual.
The same less trequency occurred in the case of parent companies rather
than one or more individual shareholders and in tort cases rather than
contract cases. It is not to say that "to pierce" is a simple process; especially
in proving it in order to reveal all the scenes behind the walls of facts, but it
is also not an impossible mission.
We came to note, through various cases earlier, that, despite the well-
established theory that justify piercing the corporate veil, the general rule
of corporate law is to maintain the legal separateness of the corporate form.
Piercing the veil remains an exception. Approaches towards piercing the
veil differ not only from one jurisdiction to another, but also within one
national system of law.
It is suggested that as long as the purpose of veil piercing is to maintain
smooth corporate behavior, I think we need to reconsider it again, I am not
saying that we might consider it as the basic method and not as an exception,
because this opinion - despite being coherently expressed by minority of
foreign authors- may drastically ruin the well-respected corporate structured
vision, but we need to dig deep attention to it, particularly with the new
effect to accelerated globalization and rising productivity, high tech rapid
improvements, opening of international foreign investments and giving
them the access to markets, the outsourced industrial production with
higher than ever speed. Some corporations may not be able to perform
36

--- Page 34 ---
1ormally by supporting employment and ther hscal reserves and policles
Vational debt has been accumulating in an accelerated way. The inability of
states and international bodies to prevent from corporate direct and indirect
violations to human rights issues, violations to environment, violations to
workers' rights or violations to the consumers -being the end users- rights...
etc. These issues require the judges to look into one given case as a single
consistent and indivisible unit when it comes to decide that the corporate
veil would be pierced.
References:
Books and research papers:
1- Cases and materials in Company Law, LS Sealy, Seventh edition,
Oxford University Press.
2- Alan Dignam and John Lowry, Company Law, Oxtord University
Pressm 4th edition, page 30.
3- Thompson, Piercing The Veil Within Corporate Groups: Corporate
Shareholders As Mere Investors, 13 Conn.J.Intl L. 379, 383 (Spring 1999)
4- R Grantham and C Rickett (eds), Corporate Personality in the 20th
Century, 1998.
5- David Winch, "Confiscation: lifting the veil of incorporation" (2013)
6- John H. Matheson, The Limits of Business Limited Liability: Entity
Veil Piercing and Successor Liability Doctrines, 31 WM. MITCHELL L. REV.
411, 420 n.28 (2005) (citing Richard v. Bell Atl. Corp., 946 F. Supp. 54, 61
(D.D.C. 1996)).
7- Frank H. Easterbrook & Daniel R. Fischel, Limited Liability and the
Corporation, 52 U. CHI. L. REV. 89, 89 (1985).
8- Drury LL. (2007). What's the Cost of a Free Pass? A Call for the Re-
Assessment of Statutes that Allow for the Elimination
9- D&O Insurance Overview. Boundas, Skarzynski, Walsh & Black LLC.
10- Why Do Privately-Held Firms Purchase Directors & Officers Liability
Insurance. Andreini & Company. Generally citing: William E. Knepper and
Ann Bailey, Liability of Corporate Officers and Directors (4th Edition).
11- Sharfman B. (2008). The Enduring Legacy of Smith v. Van Gorkom.
33 Del. J. Corp. L.
12- Petrin M. (2010). The Curious Case of Directors' And Officers'
Liability For Supervision and Management: Exploring the Intersection Of
Corporate and Tort Law. American University Law Review.
13-Stadermann F, Banis C. (2008). From 'Severability Clause' to
'Innocent Directors Clause' in Dutch D&O Policies. British Insurance Law
Association.
د. طعمة الشمري ، مجلس إدارة الشركة المساهمة، دراسة قانونية مقارنة في القانون الكويتي -14
وقوانين الولايات المتحدة الأمريكية،- كلية الحقوق- جامعة الكويت- مؤسسة الكويت للتقدم العلمي - إدارة
.التأليف والترجمة - 1985
Volume 5 - @anoniya 37

--- Page 35 ---
Piercing the Corporate Veil
‹Comparative Perspectives to the Bahraini, English and American
Legislative and Judicial Practice›
Legal Journals:
1- Latham and Watkins, In Practice, Janine Perkins, The London
Dispute Newsletter, October 2012.
2- Piercing the Corporate Veil, when is too much fiction a bad thing?
By will Hill Tankersley and Kelly Brenan, the Alabama Lawyer, January 2010.
Vol. 71, No.1.
3- Anna Farat & Denis Michon, Lifting the Corporate Veil, Limited
Liability of the Company Decision-Makers Undermined? Analysis of English,
U.S., German, Czech and Polish Approach. Common Law Review. Czech.
4- Soteris Pittas, Cyprus: Lifting The Corporate Veil, SOTERIS PITTAS
5- Personal Liability for Directors. Tennessee Journal Business Law.
Harris . Seed. arch 1952, Califomn la Lan Revien, Voleme 40 1 nase nnt,
مدى مسؤولية الشركة الأم الأجنبية عن ديون شركتها الوليدة المصرية " دراسة في بعض جوانب -7
الإفلاس الدولي لمجموعة الشركات متعددة الجنسيات (القسم الأول والثاني) . د. شريف محمد غنام -
مجلة الحقوق- مجلس النشر العملي - جامعة الكويت - العدد الأول والثاني - السنة السابعة والعشرون
- ربيع الأخر 1424 - مارس و يونيو 2003
38

