--- Page 1 ---
On International Public Works Agreements in
the Anglo-American Jurisdictions:
A Comparative Perspective
Judge Dr Mohamed A.M. Ismail
LLB, LLM, PhD (Cairo University), FCI Arb (UK)
Vice-President of the Egyptian Conseil d›Etat
Legal Adviser of the Legislation and Legal Opinion Commission-
Kingdom of Bahrain
Member of the Comite Français D'Arbitrage
State Prize Laureate, Legal Research, A.R.E,2011
مقدمه بالعربية
بتناول الباحث في البحث الماثل الطبيعة القانونية لغرامات التاخير في القانون والقضاء الانجلوامريكي بالتطبيق
على أحكام القضاء الانجليزي (Case Law) والمحكمة الفيدرالية الأمريكية والمحاكم الأمريكية، مقارنا ذلك
القضاء باتجاهات القضاء والافتاء العربي.
وتثور مشكلة غرامات التاخير حينما تشترط بعض التشريعات العربية كقانون المناقصات والمزايدات المصري
الصادر بالقانون رقم 89 لسنة 1998 أن تستحق الغرامة بمجرد التأخير، و التي تصل نسبتها إلى ٪10 من
إجمال قيمة العقد في عقود مقاولات الأعمال، إذا ما زادت مدة التأخير من المقاول عن أربعة أسابيع. فالأساس
القانوني للغرامة في هذه الحالة تشريعي واطردت تطبيقات القضاء العربي وافتائه لاسيما مجلس الدولة
المصري ممثلاً في المحكمة الإدارية العليا أن افتراض الضرر بسير المرفق العام حاصل دونما حاجه إلى إثباته
وبمجرد حدوث التأخير. فالغرامة توقع بمجرد حدوث التأخير ودون اشتراط لوقوع الضرر فضلاً انه وعلى فرض
وقوع الضرر، فالغرامه لا تقدر بمقدار هذا الضرر وإنما توقع كشريحه ثابتة منصوص عليها في التشريع حتى ولو
حاق بالمرفق العام ضررا أقلٍ من مقدار الغرامة المنصوص عليها في التشريع والعقد الذي يعتبر عادة قانون
المناقصات والمزايدات جزءا لا يتجزأ منه.
على العكس تماما فإن القضاء الانجليزي في القضية الشهيرة (Dunlop Case 1914 HL)، والتي حكم فيد
اس اللوردات The House Lords، قرر انه لا يمكن ان ينفذ شرطا عقابيا، واشترط فى قضايا اخرى عديد
سردها الباحث تفصيلا وجوب تناسب مقدار التعويض مع الضرر الذي حاق بالمرفق.
ولقد ساير القضاء الأمريكي القضاء الانجليزي في ذات النظر حتي جاءت قضية (Phillips Hong Kong, 1993)
التي ارسى بها القضاء الانجليزى (Privy Council) مبداً جديدا في صدد غرامات التاخير. وقد كانت هذه
4

--- Page 2 ---
القضية تتعلق بإنشاء نظام مراقبة بالكمبيوتر Computerization لطريق سريع في Hong Kong . يعالج
البحث هذا الاتجاه الجديد ، والاساس القانونى له فى القضاء الانجلوأمريكى ، من خلال دراسه للعديد من
القضايا في المملكة المتحدة والولايات المتحدة بمزيد من التحليل والعمق ليوضح اوجه التباين بين منهج
القانون والقضاء الانجلوامريكي من ناحيه ، والنظم القانونية العربية من ناحية اخرى بما اطردت عليه قضاءً
Volume-1 القَابُونيَّةِ 5

--- Page 3 ---
Globalization and Liquidated Damages On
International Public Works Agreements in the
Anglo-American Jurisdictions:
A Comparative Perspective
with Civil Law Legal Systems
Abstract:
The purpose of this paper is to examine the legal nature of liquidated
damages (penalty for delay) in the international public works agreements
(infrastructure projects) in the Anglo-American jurisdictions, with special
reference to the Egyptian "Conseil d'Etat" State Council decisions, in the light
of the influence of the legal globalization to these contracts.
This paper is divided into three parts. The first describes the legal
globalization
as a transnational and socio-economic phenomenon .The
second is scrutinizing Anglo-American case law perspective .The third is an
analytical and comparative perspective on the Egyptian State Council decisions
in comparison with the Egyptian cassation court decisions as the Egyptian
Cassation Court is applying directly civil law provisions.
The Egyptian State Council plays a significant role in establishing and
codifying rules of (les contrats administratifs) administrative contracts since
the administrative law is not codified in Egypt. The State Council in Egypt
is the founder of the Administrative Contracts Theory established in 1946.
Since then, courts, and the General Assembly for Legal Opinion (Fatwa) and
Legislation, have set out the legal framework of the administrative contract
criteria.
It was settled in the State Council decisions for many decades that the
contract is considered administrative if a party to the contract is a public juristic
entity, if it concerns any of the public utilities (its management or organization)
and if it includes among its provisions specific clauses that differ from civil and
6

--- Page 4 ---
commercial contracts. These provisions are called "Les Clauses Exorbitantes" 1
It is also settled that an international public works agreement having the
abovementioned criteria is an administrative contract by nature and is under the
jurisdiction of the State Council courts or subject to international arbitration
and is not under the jurisdiction of civil or commercial courts.
The system employed by the State Council is to some extent similar to the
system employed by courts exercising the common law, since the administrative
law is not codified by the Egyptian legislator. It is worth considering that
decisions of the Supreme Administrative Court are not obligatory to lower
administrative courts to follow (appeal or first instance administrative
courts). Meanwhile, lower courts are always influenced by the decisions of the
Supreme Court and, in case of different views; lower courts can deal with new
perspectives and have their own reasoning towards the use of this approach
after deliberations and voting by the majority of Judges. 2
Globalization plays a fundamental role in enhancing and modifying the
administrative contract traditional theory as a result of the new stipulations
imposed by foreign contractors entering into infrastructure agreements with
public juristic entities. A new era for a new legal structure has begun since it
is acceptable by the Egyptian legal system to stipulate that arbitration is the
only mechanism for dispute settlement in infrastructure projects 3 if it is agreed
upon by the contracting parties 4
. Moreover, the Egyptian legal system began to
accept foreign laws as the substantive laws applicable to the dispute rather than
Egyptian laws applicable in similar cases, especially in arbitration rather than
litigation.
1 Supreme Administrative court decision in 19th of May , 1962, Year 7, page 890,Dr Soliman
El Tamawy, General Principles of Administrative Contracts, ffth edition, 1991,pp.86 and
Case 851 , Year 20 in 21st of June 1980.See also decision No. 3128-24/1/1995,Legal Principles
in Administrative contracts by the Egyptian State council in 40 years Pp98-99. In France See
the leading authority in Administrative Contracts: Andre de Laubadrere, Franck Moderne and
Pierre Delvolve, Traite de Contrats Administratifs , Tome I , 2nd Edition, LGDJ, 1983,pp.211-
29,Laurent Richer Droit Des Contrats Administratifs, LGDJ,1995.
2 Deliberations are obligatory and confidential pursuant to article (166) of the Egyptian Civil
and Commercial Procedural Law No. 13 of 1968 which applies to State Council courts.
3 Article (13) of the Egyptian Arbitration Act, No. 27 of 1994, in civil and commercial disputes
stipulates that if there is an arbitration clause in the contract or arbitration agreement courts
shall be prohibited to hear the case.
4 A crucial question remains unanswered, can the parties go to the national courts if the
time bar in the agreement to start arbitration passed, (i.e. FIDIC form of contracts stipulates
time limit to start arbitration), for more details in civil law countries perspective, In Arabic,
Mohamed A.M. Ismail, Arbitration in international public works agreements(2003), Pp497-
504,Beirut, El Halabi Publishing.
Volume - 1
القَابُونينَّة
7

--- Page 5 ---
The Egyptian legal system began to recognize new clauses, such as the
stabilization clause, in favor of foreign contractors to maintain stability in
contract prices as public works agreements are considered complex and long-
term agreements. In some agreements with multinational entities, the state
cannot amend, modify or terminate the contract without the consent of the
foreign contractor, meanwhile, in the traditional theory of the administrative
contract the state can exercise unlimited power in the contract.
There was a strong debate until early 1997 about the possibility to start
arbitration procedures in administrative contracts. A leading opinion of The
General Assembly for Legal Opinion (fatwa) and Legislation in 18/12/1996
rejected arbitration in administrative contracts (international public works
agreements) as it is always related to public utilities which are owned and
managed by the nation representatives (ministries and governorates) and all its
disputes shall be settled by the national courts, as the traditional theory of the
administrative contract stipulates.
The general assembly went beyond to confirm that article (1) from The
Egyptian Arbitration Act in commercial and civil matters (no.27of 1994),
is lacking clarity and certainty 1. As a result to this approach, the Egyptian
Parliament promulgated new legislation (no. 9 of 1997) to amend article (1) of
the Arbitration Act (no 27 of 1994) and to confirm that administrative contracts
disputes can be settled through arbitration if the parties agreed upon.
These are some enhancements at the administrative contracts theory which
considered to be results from globalization and the integration of the Egyptian
legal system (to a great extent) in the global legal and economical concepts that
influenced legislator and court decisions in Egypt.
It is appropriate, at this stage, to refer to globalization as a transnational and
socio-economic phenomenon.
(I) Globalization is a transnational socio-economic phenomenon
Law is a social science that performs a significant role as an essential
mechanism needed to fulfill the needs and requirements of all human societies.
Law reflects and represents the minor image of a society, determines its common
interests and reflects its cultural traditions. On the other hand, globalization
has had its influence on various human societies, breaching cultural barriers
through the flow of commodities, capital, people, and intangibles such as
1 The General Assembly for Legal Opinion (fatwa) and Legislation, Legal opinion NO. (160)
dated 22/2 / 1997, session 18/12/1996, file No (54/1/339).
8

--- Page 6 ---
culture and values' from one country to anothet.
Information technology developments during the last two decades have
facilitated the globalization process and intensified cultural interaction,
especially legal cultural interaction between legal institutions in the entire
world. Rigid and traditional legal patterns and traditions began to accept
modifications and enhancements. Some of these patterns began to deteriorate
while others created a new legal system with new characteristics, as a result of
the merging between the legal cultures. Despite globalization movements and
the flow of a new legal culture to the legal systems of developing countries, as
well as to their socioeconomic structure and social traditions, the author of this
article strongly believes that some areas will still preserve their national oriental
identity. For instance, in Egypt, family laws and traditions relate to social
oriental traditions as well as to Coptic and Muslim religious beliefs and social
habits; these, largely, will not be greatly influenced by the cultural globalization
in the socio-legal domain. Regardless of the minor religious controversy
between Copts and Muslims in minor areas of family laws, the conservative
social culture, for both Copts and Muslims, imposes the same traditions and
customs in the domain of human familial relations?
On the other hand, legal matters that are considerably influenced by
legal cultural globalization, such as the Administrative Contracts Theory, (Le
Contrat Administratif ), will maintain some of their basic features. It is true
that penalties and sanctions stated in the Administrative Contracts Theory
have not changed to date, even with the existence of new trends aimed at the
liberalization, modernization and internationalization of the traditional theory
of administrative contracts.
Accordingly, it can be said that the rigid patterns of administrative contracts,
their substance and exorbitant features have significantly changed in the last
decade in the Egyptian legal culture, especially concerning infrastructure
agreements with foreign private entities. These new legal patterns, such as the
introduction of international public works agreements, BOT / BOOT/ BOO
agreements and PPP contracts, posed the start of new era in the Egyptian legal
1 Joseph E. Stiglitz, Globalization and its Discontents, W.W. Norton & Company Inc., 2004.
See also, by the same author, Making Globalization Work, W. W. Norton & Company, 2007.
Nobel laureate (2001) , Prof. at Columbia University, USA; Brain Snowdon , Globalization,
Development and Transition. Edward Elgar, 2007 and Mohamed S. Abdel Wahab, Cultural
Globalization and Public Policy: Exclusion of Foreign Law in the Global Village, Oxford
University Press, 2005, Vol. 8, P. 306; Mohamed A M Ismail, Globalization and New
International Public Works Agreements in Developing Countries, An Analytical Perspective,
Ashgate Publishing,UK,2011.
2 Mohamed A. M. Ismail, Public Economic Law and the New International Administrative
Contracts, El Halabi Publishing Co, Beirut, 2010, P.14, this book was awarded the State Prize in
legal research by the government of the A.R.E, 2011.
Volume -1
و القَانوييّة

--- Page 7 ---
culture, one with unique and liberal mechanisms and stipulations.
Legal cultural globalization has had its influence on legislation, litigation,
the contractual regime of the administrative contracts (new types) and,
currently, arbitration. The Arbitration Act of 1994, as a direct result of legal
cultural globalization, created the latter mechanism.
Despite the abovementioned facts, the state still maintains its role as the
employer, regulator and supervisor of these new types of contracts, although,
nowadays, this role is very limited
The latter trend is expected to open doors to the private sector to positively
participate in the economic life and to increase its role in building financing
systems and operating infrastructure projects related to public utilities.
The increase in the private sector's role is codified in the new constitutional
amendments of 2007, which reject socialism and Marxism. These ideologies
were adopted by the 1971 constitution. The new constitutional modifications,
nevertheless, adopt no specific ideology, they left the door open to presidential
and parliamentary elections to determine the necessary ideological political
and economic policy to be followed during each presidential or parliamentary
term.
This flexible trend is a direct result of cultural globalization and the influence
of the free market economy policy on the national socio-economic structure.
The role of the state shall be limited to its basic and fundamental functions, as
pointed out by the eminent economist Adam Smith.
The first element influenced by globalization was culture. Cultural
interaction is the main outcome of the flow of ideas and values into Middle
Eastern communities. Culture represents a set of practices, values, beliefs
and customs acquired by individuals as members of a distinctive society and
resulting from interaction between people!.
Cultural Globalization and Public Economic Law:
Cultural globalization has considerably affected legal cultures of the civil
law countries. State international business transactions and the traditional
Theory of Administrative Contracts were subject to the flow of liberal and global
perspectives. The state in its transactions is not in equal bargaining power with
the other private entity. Hence, the administrative contracts include exorbitant
clauses, such as the right of the administrative authority to unilaterally amend
or terminate a contract.Furthermore, the state may also unilaterally impose
certain penalties on the other contracting party. These may include: a penalty
for delay (liquidated damages in common law jurisdictions) and rescission of
1 Mohamed S. Abdel Wahab, Supra, PP. 363.
10

--- Page 8 ---
the contract (La résiliation administrative) as well as the forfeiture of deposits
(performance bonds). The impact of legal cultural globalization is significant in
the domain of international administrative contracts, especially international
public works agreements. New clauses have appeared in these contracts,
including the stabilization and arbitration clauses. The contractual regime
has undergone various changes, especially with respect to the new types of
international public works agreements concerning infrastructure projects, such
as Build, Own, Operate and Transfer contracts (BOOT), BOO or public-private
Partnership agreements (PPPs). The main target of these new contractual
mechanisms is to finance and build infrastructure projects (public utilities) in
developing countries.
Legislation has significantly developed in the area of granting concessions
for infrastructure projects and public utilities. Laws No. 100 of 1996, 229 of
1996, 3 of 1997 and 22 of 1998 amended old existing legislations such as law
No. 129 of 1947 concerning granting concessions for public utilities and law
No. 61 of 1958 on granting concessions related to exploitation of natural
resources and public utilities.
The new four legislations fall under the domains of the electricity sector;
Roads sector, specialized ports, and civil aviations and airports.
This is a real revolution in administrative contracts and state international
administrative transactions.
On the legislative level, the revolution was in the current enhancements and
modifications to the state procurement law concerning contract price as well as
granting the administration the authority to review contract prices every three
months. The administration can exercise this power in cooperation with the
contractor pursuant to certain stipulations and parameters stated under laws
No. 5 of2005 and No. 191 of 2008.1
It is also true that the Arbitration Act of 1994 and its amendment by Law
No. 9 of 1997 gave effect to some considerable changes to the Administrative
Contract Theory, especially contracts concluded by and between the state and
foreign private entities.
Liquidated damages have new trends under Law No. 89 of 1998 as well as in
litigations by State Council (Le Conseil d'Etat) courts, despite the fact that they
still exercise a punitive nature under the penalty for delay clause.
In conclusion, cultural and legal globalization have influenced the civil
law legal culture in Egypt, especially concerning international administrative
transactions and contracts entered into by, and between the State and
foreign private entities, with special emphasis on public utility projects and
1 Mohamed A. M. Ismail, Globalization and Contract Price in the Egyptian State Procurement
Law, The International Construction Law Review, London, Informa, Vol. 27, part I, Jan 2010.
Volume - 1
11 القَانُونِيَّةِ

--- Page 9 ---
international public works agreements (infrastructure projects). The entire
legal regime was influenced by these transnational phenomena: legislation,
litigation (State Council court decisions) and contractual regime. With respect
to state international transactions, a set of new rules and international customs
have flown from common law countries to our legal culture and created a new
branch of public law in Egypt.
This branch is currently well known in France, but has only practically
begun to appear in Egypt in the last few years. Lately, a few academic studies'
in the Egyptian doctrine began to focus on this new branch which is considered
of a fundamental importance to the administration.
(II) The Anglo-American Case Law:
English and American case laws share a unique perspective regarding the
liquidated damages clause stipulated under contracts. Taking cognizance of
the changes in judicial precedents witnessed during the last decade of the 20th
century, it is now necessary to analyze the current judicial policy. This may be
done through scrutinizing some of the most important cases, for case law is
deemed the leading authority in this domain as regards the common law legal
culture.
(i) English Case Law
Kemble vs. Farren (1829) was one of the leading cases that had come before
the court during the 19th century. A contract › was entered into by and between
the defendant and the contractor, stipulating the appearance of the former as
a principal comedian at the Covent Garden Theatre against a remuneration
Of £3.6 per night for four seasons. The contract also contained a provision
specifying that if either party failed to fulfill the terms of the contract, or any
Part thereof, such party shall be subject to the payment of a sum of £1000 in
liquidated damages.
During the second season, the defendant refused to act because of failure of
the contractor to meet a single payment of £3.6. The court held that the sum
of £1000 shall be made to the defendant (actor) as recompense for the failure
of the plaintiff (contractor) to make payment. Since the sum of £3.6 is very
trivial in comparison to that of £1000, the clause has thus been rendered into a
penalty clause, rather than a liquidated damages .
1 See: Dr Mohamed A. M. Ismail, Public Economic Law and The New International
Administrative Contract, El Halabi Publishing Co., Beirut, 2010,see also Ragab Mohmoud
Participation Agreements, (PPP), Dar El Nahda El Arabia, 2007, p. 3
2 Kemble vs. Farren (1829) 6 Bing 141.
12

--- Page 10 ---
In the 1906 Public Works Commissioner 1 vs. Hills case - the fourth of its
kind to be held under a railway construction contract - the indefinite sum ruled
by the court could not be a genuine pre-estimate of loss, and was therefore
regarded as a penalty clause.
In the Ford Motor Company vs. Armstrong 2 case (1915), Armstrong, a
retailer, agreed not to sell any Ford car, or any part thereof, below the set price
list; he also agreed to pay £250 in liquidated damages for every act of breach.
The court held that the sum of £250 was a penalty since it is not equal to the
damages encountered.
In the leading case of Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre vs. New Garage 3 (1914)
The House of Lords Stated: "The essence of liquidated damages is a genuine
covenanted pre-estimate of loss" Lord Dunedin pointed out. He elaborated:
"Though the parties to a contract who use the words "Penalty" or " Liquidated
damages" may primafacia be supposed to mean what they say, yet the expression
is not conclusive. The court must find out whether the payment stipulated is in
truth a penalty or liquidated damages"
As Eggleston 4 pointed out, the terminology itself is not decisive, and if, as a
matter of construction, the courts find that liquidated damages are penalties or
vice verse, they will award accordingly.
Lord Dunedin's judgment in the Dunlop case remains the objective test on
which following judgments have relied.
In addition to the abovementioned phrases, Lord Dunedin stated:
"- The essence of a penalty is the payment of money stipulated as a threat to
the offending party; meanwhile, the essence of liquidated damages is a genuine
covenanted pre-estimate of damage.
- Whether a stipulated sum is regarded as a penalty or a liquidated damage
is a question of construction to be decided upon the terms and inherent
circumstances of each particular contract and should be determined as at the
time of making the contract, not the time of breach.
- To assist this task of construction, various tests have been suggested
which, if applicable to the case under consideration, may prove helpful or even
conducive. Such are :
1 Public Works Commissioner vs. Hills, (1906) AC 368.
2 Ford Motor Company Ltd (En gland) vs. Brain Eggleston, Liquidated Damages and
Extension of Time in Construction Contracts, Second Edition, Blackwell Science, 1997. P.59,
.60
3 Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Company Ltd vs New Garage & Motor Company Ltd (1915) AC 79.
4 Brian Eggleston, Supra, P.56.
Volume - 1
13

--- Page 11 ---
a) The stipulated sum will be held to be a penalty if it is extravagant and
unconscionable in amount in comparison with the greatest loss that could
conceivably be proved to have followed from the breach.
b) The stipulated sum will be held as a penalty if the breach is represented only
in the failure to pay a sum of money that is less than the stipulated sum.
This, though one of the most ancient instances, is truly a corollary to the last
test.
() There is presumption (but no more) that the stipulated sum is a penalty
when "a single sum is made payable by way of compensation as a consequence
of the occurrence of one or more events, some of which may occasion serious
and other trifling damage".
d) The stipulated sum, being a genuine pre-estimate of the expected damage
as a consequence of the breach, should not render price pre-estimation an
obstacle or an impossibility. On the contrary, that is just the situation where
it is probable that the pre-estimated damage is the true bargain between the
parties".
It is clear that during that period, and up till the last decade of the 20th
century, English courts did not validate penalty clauses.
The sum stipulated by the parties must reflect the "genuine pre-estimated
loss" and must be reasonably adequate to the actual loss. This should be
determined by the contracting parties.
The burden of proving that the stipulated sum (clause) is actually a penalty
lies on the party challenging the clause. It is the duty of the said party to prove
the punitive nature.
In a recent case famous for applying new principles, English courts had
different perspectives. This is evident as follows:
Philips Hong Kong Ltd vs. Attorney General of Hong Kong (1993)1
In the leading case of Phillips Hong Kong, Phillips entered into a contract
with the Hong Kong government to design, supply, install and commission a
computerized supervisory system for a new route to the approach roads and
twin tunnels. The contract was one of seven contracts; six of which contained
a flow chart setting out a program for the progress of work. In addition, there
were other flow charts setting out the work of five different contracts. The flow
charts identified key dates on which the work performed by Phillips interfaced
with the programs of other contracts. Clause 27 of the Phillips contract
imposed an obligation on Phillips to meet its key dates; simultaneously, clause
1 Philips Hong Kong Ltd vs. Attorney General of Hong Kong (1993), 61 BLR 41.
14

--- Page 12 ---
29 provided that failure to meet key dates shall entail the payment of liquidated
damages.
The Privy Council held that the provision stipulating liquidated damages
under the contract entered into between the parties was a genuine pre-estimate
and was thus enforceable since the parties were able to estimate with a reasonable
degree of certainty the extent of their liability and the potential risk. The court
applied the party autonomy and freedom of contract principles. It adopted
an objective assessment that will not normally identify situations where the
application of the provision could result in a larger sum being recovered by the
injured party as compared to the actual loss sustained. The court concluded
that if the liquidated damages clause is a genuine pre-estimate of what the loss
is likely to be, thus, it is not a penalty clause.
The fact remains that the issue has to be determined objectively and that
judgment must be made on the date the contract was entered into.
The court held that in the case of a governmental body, the nature of
the loss is especially difficult to evaluate because the government reasonably
adopted a formula that reflected the loss of returns on the capital involved
on a daily basis 1
The following two cases are a selection of recent English cases that illustrate
the application of these rules as influenced by the Philips case:
1- M & J Polymers Ltd vs. Imerys Minerals Ltd 2
In 1991, Imerys (the defendant) had received supplies of chemical products
from Polymers (the appellant). In July 2003, both parties entered into a new
contract effective until December 2004.
Pursuant to the latter agreement, Polymers was to supply Imerys with
chemicals to be used in producing high quality printings; nevertheless, there
was a shortage in acrylic acid, one of the ingredients to be supplied, that would
last till the end of 2004. Pursuant to the terms of agreement, the defendant
terminated the contract. Claimant alleged that the contract termination was
illegal.
The court held that the take or pay clause stipulated under the contract held
by and between the parties is not a penalty, it is a liquidated damage clause for
damages that are a genuine pre-estimate of loss.
The court confirmed that English courts had never before held a take or pay
clause to be a penalty clause. Furthermore, the court rejected the counterclaim
1 See: Brian Eggleston, Supra, P. 61-2.
2 M &] Polymers Ltd vs. Imerys Minerals Ltd, (2008) I AIl ER (COMM 893).
Volume -1
القَانُونِيَّةِ
15

--- Page 13 ---
made by Imerys (defendant).
2-Liberty Mercian Limited vs. Dean & Dyball Construction Limited'
:(2008)
In the latest case of liquidated damages, the English court held that the
liquidated damages clause is a genuine pre-estimate of the specific loss of the
incomplete part.
The dispute concerned a construction contract. The question before court
was whether or not there was a sectional completion of works and whether the
liquidated damages clause was applicable at this stage or was it considered an
unenforceable penalty clause.
The court applied the choice made by the parties and enforced the liquidated
damages clause.
(ii) American case law
The doctrine in the United States defines liquidated damages as a stipulated
sum of money estimated by the contracting parties upon contract execution to
Which extent any breach of contract causes damage (loss)2 .
Liquidated damages mean the sum agreed upon by the parties to be paid in
case of breach of contract. These damages are usually payable without the need
to start litigation or arbitral proceedings?
American courts adopted a judicial policy similar, but not identical, to that
of the English Courts.
In April 1891, in the case of W.P.Tinkham Resondent vs. Ferdivand Satorit,
the Court of Appeal of Missouri held that the seller was not confined in the
amount of his damages to the penalty but could recover a greater sum. The
seller and the buyer entered into a real estate contract which stipulated that
the $100 down payment made by the buyer would not be refunded if he was in
breach of the contract. The buyer in fact breached the contract after the seller
was awarded an amount greater than the $100. The buyer sought a review of the
stance claiming that the damages incurred by the seller were limited to the sum
1 Liberty Mercian limited vs. Dean & Dyball Construction Limited, (2009) BLR 29.
See also (http://www.balill.org/ew/cases/EWHC/TCC/2008/2617.html)
2 Oklahoma City University Law Review, The Use and Abuse of Liquidated Damages in Federal
Defense Contracts: An analysis . Vol.8,Summer 1983,N-3,P.251.
3 Scott M.Tyler , in public Construction Contracts, Duke Law Journal, Vol.44,p.357.
4 44 Mo.APP.659,1891 Mo-APP. LEXIS 206 .
16

--- Page 14 ---
of liquidated damages specified under the contract entered into by the parties.
The court held that a contract presenting the question of whether a deposit
would be taken as a penalty or as liquidated damages was to be interpreted by
the test of party intention. The court held that the seller was not confined, in
the amount of his damages, to the penalty but could rather obtain a greater
sum.
In the case of Mercer vs. Stupp Bros. Bridge Iron Company ' (Aug. 1904),
the Court of Appeal of Illinois observed that the sum mentioned in the contract
was converted by the parties themselves into a penalty.
The reason why the law did not favor refunds is that the court found that
if the clause fixing the amount of damages appeared to have been inserted to
secure prompt performance of the agreement, it had to be treated as a penalty
clause; accordingly, no more than the actual damages proved could be recovered.
The facts of this case show that under the terms of the construction
contract, the company shall pay $5 per day as a penalty for delay in completing
the bridge.
The issue before the court was whether the $5 represented liquidated
damages, as alleged by Mercer county, or an illegal penalty, as alleged by the
Company.
The court held the above mentioned conclusion.
In May 1913, in the case of Pacific Hardware and Steel Companyvs. the United
States government, the United States Court of Claims found that a contract of
the United States Navy Department to deliver materials to a commission in
Panama contained a penalty clause. The contract provided for deductions to be
made in the contract price to be paid to the plaintiff for any delays in delivery.
The contract also provided that any delays caused by factors other than the
own doing of the plaintiff, and for which the government suffered no damages
or inconvenience, may be grounds for a waiver of deductions at the discretion
of the commission's Chairman. Deductions were later made to the contract
price for failure of the plaintiff to make prompt delivery. The court considered
whether the contract provision was for liquidated damages or was only a penalty.
It found that the parties had no pre-intention to cause any damages, nor did
the intention exist upon execution of the contract. The parties were familiar
with the fact that if the damages clause was to be waived because the delay
was due to the reasons stated under the contract, the provision then entailed a
penalty not liquidated damages.
1 115 III. APP. 298; 1904 III,. APP, LEXIS 312.
Volume -1
القَانونِيَةِ
17

--- Page 15 ---
In the April 1914 case of James Golden vs. H. A. Mckim, the Supreme Court
of Nevada 1 reversed the judgment of the trial court finding that the actual
award was based on a penalty provision in the contract rather than on the actual
damages. The court further ordered a new trail as it found that the excavator
should have been relieved from the imposition of the liquidated damages
provision of the contract.
In the leading case of R. A. El Zey vs. the City of Winterest, lowa 2 (Nov.
1915), the claimant entered into contract with the city to provide it with paving
works. Although the claimant performed his part under the contract, the city
refused to pay for his rendered work for failure to complete on due time. The
Trail and Appeal Courts ruled in favor of the claimant.
The Supreme Court of Jowa ruled that the damage clause relied on by the
city was a penalty clause rather than a liquidated damages one.
The city failed to prove actual damages.
The court added that failure of the claimant to deliver as contracted was due
to failure of the city to grade the streets before paving so work may continue as
agreed. The court concluded that, even if the damage clause was construed as
liquidated damages, no damages would have been equitably allowed under the
circumstances. The court affirmed the judgment against the city.
In September 1920, the Supreme Court of Nebraska, in the case of
Sunderland and Brothers Company vs. Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Rail
Road Company 3, held that the liquidated damages clause was a penalty clause.
The court found that the penalty specified under the contract was
unconstitutional because it provided for both actual damages as well as a fixed
sum; the assessment was an amount in excess of the actual damages sustained
The shipper in this case sought and received damages for the carrier's delay in
the shipment and delivery of goods under the Reciprocal Demurrage Act, Neb
Rev. Stat. 6159, 6160, 616 (1913). The Act allowed the shipper to recover $1 per
day for each car in addition to the actual damages sustained for each day's delay
in shipment and delivery. The court added that this penalty was in excess of the
compensation to the shipper and, as such, was properly considered as a penalty.
The court confirmed that damages resulting from delay in the shipment of
various commodities were variable depending on the type of commodity and its
current market value. The amount of $1 did not bear any reasonable relation to
1 37 Nev, 205; 141 P. 676; 1914 Nev. LEXIS 25.
2 172 IOWA 643; 154 N.W. 901; 1915 IOWA sup. LEXIS 342.
3 104 Neb. 322; 179 N.W. 546; 1920 Neb. LEXIS 264.
18

--- Page 16 ---
the damage sustained by the shipment of each type of commodity.
This perspective of the American courts has not changed, even in the new
millennium.
In the case of IPC Retail Properties vs. Oriental Gardens INC, Chung M. wand
and Tomy W. Ho ' (March 2004), the appellant argued that the accelerated rent
provision was an unenforceable penalty. The Court of Appeal of Kansas held
that the provision was not a reasonable estimate of damages and could only be
applied to breaches where damages could be easily ascertained. The provision
was an unenforceable penalty. The court directed that because the landlord
had re-rent the premises, the proper measure of damages was the difference,
reduced to the current value,
between the fixed rent in the lease contract and
the sum for which the premises were rented to other parties for the remainder
of the term.
The findings of the court can be summarized as follows:
1- The distinction between a penalty and a provision of liquidated damages
is that a penalty is a security for the performance of work while a provision
of liquidated damages is a sum to be paid in case of failure to deliver on
performance.
2- The burden of proving that a liquidated damages clause constitutes an
unenforceable penalty rests with the party challenging the provision.
3- When determining whether a stipulated damages amount constitutes a
liquidated damages clause or an unenforceable penalty, the instrument must
be considered as a whole; furthermore, the situation of the parties, the nature
of the subject matter and the circumstances surrounding its execution must be
taken into account.
4- Two fundamental considerations support the holding that a contractual
provision concerned
with setting liquidated damages rather than being
a penalty. The first is that the amount stipulated is conscionable, that is
reasonable in view of the value of the subject matter of the contract and of the
probable or presumptive loss in case of breach. The second is that the nature
of the transaction is such that the amount of actual sum of resulting damages
would not be easily and readily determinable.
5- A contract provision will be considered a penalty where there is no attempt
to calculate the amount of actual damages that might be sustained in case of
breach. When the amount of damages is equivalent to the sum of breach of a
major or minor contract provision, or of a total or partial breach, it becomes
evident that the parties undertook no attempt to calculate the actual damages.
1 32 Kan. App. 2d 554; 86 543; 2004 Kan. App. LEXIS 236
Volume - 1
19 القَانُونيَّةِ

--- Page 17 ---
6- Where a lease allows the landlord to collect future rent, as well as actual
damages, the accelerated rent provision is, in its nature, equivalent to an
unenforceable penalty. Such a provision does not constitute a settlement, and
allows the landlord to have his cake and eat it too.
7- A clause that specifies a minimum amount to be paid, and then leaves the
door wide open to prove actual damages, is not considered a valid liquidated
damages clause.
8- To be able to make recovery under a liquidated damages clause, the amount
of liquidated damages must bear some reasonable relationship to the actual
injury caused by the breach. If the amount bears no such relationship, it is thus
considered a penalty and is treated as void.
Despite the different conclusion adopted by the court in the case of Hutton
Contracting Company Inc. vs. The City of Coffeyville ' (April 2007), the court
adopted some of its principles in the IPC Retail Properties case in 2004. In the
Hutton Contracting case, the plaintiff (contractor) used the defendant (the
city) in the United States District Court of Kansas to obtain the unpaid amount
of a contract to construct a power line and a fiber-optic line. After a jury trail,
the District Court ordered the city to pay the contractor a sum of $24,659.47 in
addition to a retainage of $110,159.47 minus $85.500 in liquidated damages to
which the city was entitled.
The contractor appealed but the United States Court Of Appeal of the Tenth
Circuit affirmed the judgment. The court ruled that the contractor was
responsible for the delay with no reason of force majeure to excuse them. The
concern of the court was the damages caused by the delay since the time factor
was of essence to this particular contract ?
The court referred to the judgment sentenced in the IPC Retail case in many
occasions including those when the burden of proving that a liquidated damages
clause constitutes an unenforceable penalty rests with the party challenging the
provision.
In the case of Ameritech Construction Corp. vs. William F. Cummings, the
Court of Virginia (Circuit Court of the City of Winchester), a construction
company sought to recover from the homeowner liquidated damages at the
1 487 F. 3 d 772; 2007 U.S. App. LEXIS 9914.
2 66 VA. CIR 328: 2005 VA. CIR. LEXIS 38.
20

--- Page 18 ---
of $5,225 plus its reasonable attorney's fees. The court held that the sum of
liquidated damages was 30 percent of the total contract price and that it still
remained to be proven whether this amount was grossly in excess of, and out
of all proportion to, the actual damages. There were many unanswered factual
questions and considerations in assessing the actual damages as well as the
question of their lawful validity.
The court affirmed the validity of the liquidated damages clause and denied its
punitive nature.
In a very recent case of El Centra Mall vs. Payless Shoe Source ' (April 2009), the
defendant appealed a judgment ruled by the Superior Court of Orange County
(California). The court ruled that the liquidated damages clause stated under
the commercial lease agreement signed between the parties was not an unlawful
penalty and awarded contract damages to the plaintiff (landlord) pursuant to
that clause.
The court found that substantial evidence supported the conclusion that the
defendant had not, under the Civil Code, met its responsibility of showing the
estimate of damages. The court of Appeal of California affirmed the judgment
ruled by the trial court. The defendant (Payless Shoes) also failed to present
evidence, usually through expert testimony, that a charge of 10 cents per foot
did not represent a reasonable estimate of the actual damages. The burden
of proof lied on the defendant to demonstrate that the liquidated damages
provision was actually a penalty one. The court concluded that the provision is
a valid liquidated damages clause.
Substantial Completion of the Contract :
In the case of Carrathers Construction Company L.L.C vs. the City of South
Hutchinson, Kansas 2 (May, 2008), The Court of Appeal of Kansas found that
the evidence established that the construction company failed to achieve a
substantial completion of the contract until 12 January 2004, and that it was
not finally completed until 13 January 2004.
The amount of the liquidated damages under the contract was reasonable
when viewed prospectively as well as in relation to the actual damages caused
by the breach. The summary judgment awarded liquidated damages in favor
of the city. The Court of Appeal found that the nature of the transaction was
1 174 Cal. App. 4th 58; 2009 cal. App. LEXIS 806.
2 39 kan. App. 2d 703; 184 P. 3d 943; 2008 Kan. App. LEXIS 85.
Volume - 1
21 القَانوبيَّةِ

--- Page 19 ---
such that the amount of actual damages resulting from delay was not easily and
readily determinable and affirmed the summary judgment.
It is also relevant to refer to the old case of Thermodyn Contractors Inc. vs
the General Services Administration 1, The contractor "Thermodyn" refused
to make payment of the liquidated damages specified by the government at a
sum of $22,630 as a result of failure to complete the work in the Texas station
on due time. The contractor affirmed substantial completion of works before
31 March 1993.
The Court of Appeal rejected the contractor's defense and held that the
liquidated damages clause is valid and enforceable as the administration has
not started utilizing the public utility.
In light of the previous judgments, the concept of substantial completion
can be defined as the time at which the work (or a specified part thereof) has
progressed to the point where, in the opinion of the Engineer and in accordance
with the contract documents, it is sufficiently complete for utilization for the
purposes it was intended.
This concept is a factor necessary for the maintenance of fairness in the
contractual relationship as well as for avoiding any future unforeseen matters
between the contracting parties.
(III)- Penalty Clauses or Liquidated Damages in Accordance with the
Egyptian Legislation and Courts Decisions :
Liquidated Damages at the Egyptian Legislation:
Liquidated damages
pursuant to the Egyptian legislation are penalty
clauses applicable for the delay of the execution of works. The penalty is dual in
nature, it acts as a punitive clause and exercises pressure upon the contractor.
Article (23) of the State Procurement Law promulgated by law No. 89 of 1998
stipulates that:
"If the contracting party delayed the work after the set completion date, the
authority concerned, can, for public interest, grant the contractor an extension
of time for total completion and it can impose a penalty (fine) pursuant to
percentages and rules stipulated by executive regulations. The total (fine) shall
not exceed (3%) of the total contract value in purchasing immovables, receiving
services, consultation studies and technical works, and shall not exceed (10%)
in public works and transportation".
The administration (state) shall collect the penalty for delay (fine) "ipso
1 Tylor, Op. cit., P. 383. See also Mohamed Abdel Mageed Ismail, International Public Works
Agreements Arbitration , El Halabi Publishing, Beirut, 2003. P.220.
22

--- Page 20 ---
facto" without warning or any preliminary (or Judicial) procedures. The
contracting party can be exempt from the penalty, after a legal opinion from
the State Council, if the delay was out of the control thereof. The authority
concerned accepts in this case, after consulting with the State Council, to exempt
the contracting party from the fine, if the delay did not cause any damage.
The penalty imposed and collected from the contracting party will not
violate the right of the authority concerned to reclaim compensation from the
contractor for delay in executing works.
Article (83) of the executive regulations stipulates that:
"The contractor is obliged to complete works to be able to do preliminary
completion at stipulated time."
If the contractor delays the completion of the work, the contracting
authority, can, for public interest, grant him an extension of time for total
completion. The penalty (fine) shall be imposed, from the beginning of this
extension of time until the preliminary completion at a rate of (1%) for every
week or part of a week.
The total value of the penalty (fine) shall not exceed (10%) of the total value
of the contract price.
The penalty (fine) shall be calculated and deducted from the value of total
works (take over certificate shall be considered), if the authority concerned
decided that the delayed part of works of the project will directly or indirectly
prevent the state from the utilization thereof at the stipulated time. If the
authority concerned decided that the delayed part of the works will not cause
such prevention, the fine calculation will be pursuant to previous percentages
and conditions from the value of the delayed part of works only.
"The fine shall be immediately imposed upon occurrence of the delay without
taking any other procedures (i.e. notification, or any judicial procedures)".
It is appropriate to refer to the previous State Procurement Law promulgated
by law No. 9 of 1983 and the executive regulations thereof and abrogated by the
current legislation (No. 89 of 1998). It was prohibited, until the new legislation
was promulgated, to exempt the contractor from the penalty even if no damages
occurred to the state.
The situation at the previous legislation was that the penalty was compulsory
and obligatory even if there were no damages to the contracting public juristic
entity.
The new trend with the 1998 legislation and the executive regulations
thereof is that a contractor can be exempt from the penalty if the legal opinion
Volume - 1
23 القَانُونِيَّة

--- Page 21 ---
department at the State Council approved the exemption. Otherwise the
contractor is obliged to pay the fine up to the cap (ceiling) stipulated under
article (23) of the 1998 legislation, and article (83) of the executive regulations
(10% of the total value of the contract price) even if there is no loss or damage to
the state!!. If there is a delay, the penalty should be paid "Ipso facto" regardless
of the fact that no damage or loss was suffered by the state.
Despite the fact that there are some enhancements in the new trend
adopted by the current legislation, the fine still has its punitive and exorbitant
nature. The penalty is due, at any circumstances, when there is a delay even in
light of the current legislation stipulations. The penalty is an extravagant and
exorbitant clause in the agreement in light of the state procurement law.
Public juristic entities (i.e. ministries, governorates, the cabinet, etc ....) in
Egypt still accept this nature and apply these stipulations by state procurement
laws (No. 9 of 1983 and No. 89 of 1998) without considering the harmful effect
on the contractor by calculating this punitive penalty (10% of the total value of
the contract price) and setting off this amount from his payments, especially
the final certificate. The contractor has to reclaim this amount through either
State Council courts of arbitration. This paper will examine the decisions of
the Supreme Administrative Court of the Egyptian State Council and the legal
opinion department (fatwa) from a comparative perspective with the Egyptian
civil law perspective and cassation court in Egypt (civil and commercial circuits).
A) The Penalty under the State Procurement Law of (1998) and the Pre-
estimated Compensation under the Egyptian Civil Code |Legislation) :
1- Article (224) of the Egyptian civil code stipulates that: "the agreed
compensation is not due if the debtor proved that the creditor did not suffer
any damages (loss).
2- A judge (or arbitrator) can reduce the amount of compensation if the
debtor proved that there is an exaggeration in that amount to a great extent or
that the original obligation was partially executed.
3- Any agreement contrary to the abovementioned provisions 224/1 and
224/2 is null and void".
Pursuant to article 225, if "he damages exceeded the agreed compensation
value, the creditor cannot claim more than the stipulated amount unless the
debtor is accused of committing fraud or a fundamental mistake".
The Egyptian doctrinel explains this agreed compensation as a pre-
estimated compensation agreed upon and stipulated between the contracting
1 Dr PAbdel Wadood Yehia, Obligation stipulations at Egyptian Civil Law, Cairo(1987) pp 52-
55 and Egyptian Cassation Court ,decision No 227, Civil circuit ,year 19,session 25/12/1968.
24

--- Page 22 ---
Parties under the agreement or any of its appendices. This compensation is not
due in the absence of loss or damages to the creditor. The court or arbitral
tribunal can reduce the compensation if it is not adequate to the damages or
"the contractor executed the contract partially, partial execution" to create a
contractual balance between the due compensation amount and the damages.
This dimension in the Egyptian civil code (which is based on Napoleonic codes)
is to maintain fairness and balance of the contractual relationship.
These rules are mandatory pursuant to the Egyptian civil code.
The question is to compare the nature of the pre-estimated and agreed
compensation, on one hand and penalties stipulated under the Egyptian State
Procurement Law of (1998) on the other.
According to the nature of the penalties (fines) under article (23) of law No.
89 of 1998, these penalties resemble a fine on the contractor in public works
agreements (domestic and international) up to (10%) of the total value of the
contract price even if no damages occurred to the state contracting entity.1
This is a mandatory rule in the Egyptian legal system under an administrative
contract. Consequently, the state must take this action of punitive nature
pursuant to the law and exorbitant clauses in the administrative contract in
light of this legislation without a need to any judicial action.
Conversely, the agreed compensation (Liquidated damages) in the Egyptian
civil code applies to civil and commercial contracts which fall in the private
law scope. First, the compensation aims to compensate the creditor in case of
damages only. Second, this compensation should be fair and adequate to the
actual loss. Third, the national court or arbitral tribunal can exercise its power
to review the amount of compensation to assure that it is fair and adequate.
These rules are mandatory in the domain of civil and commercial agreements.
International construction contracts fall under the scope of this article.
Meanwhile, public works administrative contracts, whether domestic or
international, fall under the scope of article (23) of the state procurement
law and executive regulations thereof fall under article (83), unless there are
different stipulations by faring contractor.
The Egyptian law recognizes rules the application of which can be avoided
by the agreement of the contracting parties, they cannot avoid the application
of any mandatory rules by their mutual consent as it is a matter of public policy.
Thus, parties to any agreement cannot violate any valid mandatory rule under
any circumstances at the Egyptian legal system.
1 It is worth mentioning that parties to the contract can stipulate different percentage or
cap and this can supersede cap or percentages stipulated by law (This very rarely happens) an
opinion from The General Assembly For Legal Opinion(fatwa) And Legislation, No. (800)
dated 13/12/1999 session 20/ 10/ 1999 file No 54/1/ 358.
Volume - 1
25 القَانُونيَّةِ

--- Page 23 ---
B) Decisions of Egyptian Courts:
(i) Egyptian State Council :
Courts' decisions:
As the State Council has been codifying principles of administrative
contracts since 1946, the Supreme Administrative Court distinguished between
penalties in administrative contracts and liquidated damages which were pre-
estimated and agreed upon in civil and commercial transactions (private law
contracts).
The court confirmed that: "Penalties in administrative contracts differ in
nature from pre-estimated compensation in civil and commercial contracts.
The latter is a pr-estimated compensation agreed upon between the parties
and payable upon breach of contract by any of the contracting parties. This
compensation is conditioned to be paid in all stipulations of the Egyptian
law for compensation in general, such as the necessity of damages to the
other contractor, notification to the party who caused the breach and a court
judgment which can reduce compensation if one of the parties proved that
compensation exceeds damages or loss.
Meanwhile, the justification of penalties in administrative contracts is
to guarantee the execution of these contracts at the stipulated time. The
fundamental principle in administrative law of "running the public utilities in
discipline and regularity" is the main justification and reason behind codifying
these penalties in administrative contracts. These penalties (fines) are imposed
by the administration (state) as an administrative procedure without court
judgment or arbitral award, once a breach by the contractor occurs, the state
can calculate the fine and settle the account of the contractor by setting-off
the amount of fine from the payments made thereby pursuant to the contract
without any necessity or need to prove damages.
It is not acceptable from the contractor to prove that no damages occurred,
as the administration (state) has stipulated, under the contract, a certain time
for completion of works, taking into consideration the essential need to public
utility to execute works at the stipulated time without delay 1 . Damages are
always presumed".
The Supreme Court elaborated in this leading case that "the penalty (fine)
is applicable in case of delay without a need to notify the contractor or to prove
that damages occurred. If the appeal administrative court stipulated that there
must be damages to the state to apply the penalty, this judgment by the appeal
1 Supreme administrative court - Egyptian State Council, principles of Supreme Administrative
Court and the General Assembly for Legal Opinion (fatwa) and Legislation in administrative
contracts in forty years, decision 1772-29,5/2/1985 and decision 741-27,28/5/1985. In the same
meaning, decision 612-2,21/9/1960.
26

--- Page 24 ---
court should be annulated".
The court stated, in addition to the abovementioned principles, that the
administration (state) can reconsider the surrounding circumstances of the
contract and exempt the contractor from the penalty (fine) if it assumed that
there is no harm to the public interest caused by the delay, or that the final
completion of works at the stipulated time is not necessary in this particular
case. This is an implied exemption to the contractor from the penalty (fine). 1
The Supreme Administrative Court exempt the contractor in some
occasions from the penalty (fine) despite the fact that it has confirmed
the punitive nature of the penalty as a penalty clause in the public works
agreement imposed by the state upon the contractors without a need to
proof that damages occurred to the state. In this case, there is a presumption
that damages exist promptly when there is a delay.
In the past, the administration could not exempt the contractor from the
penalty as it needed a court decision or a legal opinion from the department
concerned (fatwa department) at the State Council pursuant to the current
legislation No. 89 of 1998. This is the only difference between the old and new
legislation as the new legislation facilitated the process for the state to exempt
the contractor from the penalty by only a legal opinion from the opinion
department (fatwa) rather than a court judgment which may take many years.
If the contractor failed to obtain a legal opinion in his favor, he has to start
either arbitration or litigation for some years. During these years, the value of
the currency may possibly depreciate causing the inflation rate to increase in
third world countries, in particular, and the contractor can only reclaim the
fine deducted from his payments plus an interest rate of 5% from the date of
reclaiming the amount until the actual payment by the state through either
an enforceable court judgment (appeal court Judgment at least) or an arbitral
award pursuant to the Egyptian Arbitration Act No. 27 of 1994 and the
amendments thereof (law No. 9 of 1997) confirming the application of this act
to administrative contracts whether national or international.
Moreover, It is very difficult to deny the loss to a contractor and in addition
the consequential loss that he could not recover even by a court judgment in
most cases. At that stage, the significance of arbitration appears as it is in most
cases prompt and adequate to the loss because of the vast authority entrusted
to arbitrators and the flexibility to apply different rules of law in various cases.
The parties can achieve a rapid resolution through a final and binding award.
The Supreme Administrative Court in recent decisions 2 confirmed an
1 Ibid.
2 Supreme Administrative Court decision in case 10834 year (47) 30/5/2006 Third circuit
and case 11986 year (48) 16/1/2007 Third circuit.(unpublished decisions).
Volume -1
27 القَانويّة

--- Page 25 ---
extravagant and exorbitant clause of the fines as a penalty for delay despite the
fact that in certain cases the contractor may be exempt.
It is fundamental to refer, at this stage, that the supreme administrative
court in one of the most recent decisions held that "at the scope of application
of the previous law No 9 of 1983, the administration can impose a fine 1% of
the contract value in the first week of delay or part of it , 1.5 % of the contract
value in the second week of delay or part of it , 2 % of the contract value of the
third week of delay or part of it, 2.5% of the contract value of the fourth week of
delay or part of it and 4% of the contact value of every month of delay or part of
it . The total amount shall not exceed 15% of the total contract price according
to the final certificate."
A new approach was adopted by the court confirming a new perspective in
interpreting law No 9 of 1983.The court confirmed that the above mentioned
rates shall not be calculated together which means that in the fourth week of
delay the court shall apply a fine of only 2.5 % rather than the old practice by
courts which used to add the fine of the four weeks together to be 7 % of the
total value of the contract price:
.1%+1.5%+2%+2.5% = 7%
The court confirmed that there is no addition to these percentages by
calculating them together. Moreover, the court added another new approach
that, in certain contracts, the administration can get benefit from part of the
completed works by the contractor, the stipulated percentage 2.5 % at the fourth
week, pursuant to the new interpretation, shall be calculated of the price of the
other part of the contract that has not been completed.
The price of the delayed part =107355.5 Egyptian pounds X 2.5 % = 2684
Egyptian pounds.
This amount shall be deducted from the final certificate by set off. 1
This new approach reflects to what extent how globalization affects the
application and interpretation of the legislative clauses even if it is punitive
and extravagant. It is clear to what extent judges are trying to achieve fairness
at the contractual relationship between state and contractor. They are obliged
to apply the legislation as stipulated by the legislator. It is clear how there is an
essential need to adopt new concepts by the Egyptian legislator which are not
1 The Supreme Administrative Court ,case 11874,year 49, session, 10/3/2009 (unpublished)
28

--- Page 26 ---
exist even in the new legislation No 89 of 1989.1
The General Assembly for Legal Opinion (Fatwa) and Legislation:
In 1965 the General Assembly for Legal Opinion (Fatwa) and Legislation
pointed out that "the nature of administrative contracts is different from the
nature of civil contracts as administrative contracts are made by and between
a public juristic entity and a private entity in order to achieve public interest.
The contracting parties in administrative contracts, entered into by the state,
are not in equal bargaining power. The target of these contracts is to value
public interest over the interest of the contractor. This target must appear in
the provisions of the contract, the contractual relationship and, in particular,
the application and interpretation of the contract.
The administration (state) shall consider the punitive clauses stipulated
under the contract and which are
suitable to the nature, value and time
considerations thereof in order to achieve final completion in a certain method
so as to maintain regularity of public utilities..... In case of delay in execution
by the contractor, there is a fundamental presumption that damages exist
regardless of the practical reality. Any delay by the contractor is considered
an act of violation and unorganization employed by the administration in
managing the institutions thereof. There is no doubt that this delay interferes
with public interest which is the main concern in administrative contracts". 2
In another decision, the General Assembly confirmed the views of the
decisions of the Supreme Court that "the penalty for delay must be calculated
and deducted from the payments made by the contractor by set-off. The
contractor cannot be exempt from this penalty if the administration was ready
to accept works upon final completion. The contractor can only be exempt if the
state delayed accepting works past the stipulated time . The existing case was
that the administration was ready for inspecting, commissioning and accepting
works meanwhile the contractor delayed. The General Assembly applied the
penalty for delay clauses"
A leading principle confirmed that a pre-exemption from the penalty for
delay in a contract is illegal. The power to exempt a contractor shall be exercised
1 Dr Mohamed A M Ismail , Globalization and Liquidated Damages in the International Public
Works Agreements , An Analytical Perspective for the Penalty of Delay Clause in Infrastructure
Agreements , The International Construction Law Review , London , Informa, Vol. 26,Part
4,Oct.2009.
2 Legal Opinion No. 845 issued on 6/9/1965 session 4/8/1965 file No (78/1/37).
3 Legal opinion (116), issued on 25/1/1988, session 23/12/1987, file No. (32/2/1641) and in
the same meaning see: Legal opinion No. (1196) dated 28/12/1991, session 1/12/1991 ,file
(54/1/283)
Volume -1
29 القَانُونِيَةِ

--- Page 27 ---
only if it is necessary and in light of legislative and contractual stipulations (set
out by the Egyptian legislator and Egyptian State Council)'
In one of the recent decisions, which fall in the scope of application of the
State Procurement Law of (1998), the General Assembly decided that "penalty
for delay in public works agreement is obligatory. There is an obligation upon
the contractor to achieve final completion at stipulated time in the contract.
If the contractor delayed in the execution of works as a result to default by the
administration to execute its obligations, this obligation by the administration
is fundamental to the contractor to carry out his obligations. The mutual
consent of the contracting parties to modify the contract and add a clause for the
extension oftime, impliedly means an exemption from the penalty for delay atthe
stipulated extension of time period added to the contract by the parties" 2
The General Assembly affirmed in many occasions that civil and
administrative contracts must be executed according to the principle of good
faith (bona fide). The penalty for delay is stipulated for the specific purpose
of regularly maintaining the attainment of public utility at the stipulated
time. Damages are presumed. The contractor cannot be exempt unless there
is a force majeure or default by the administration'. The administration has
to exercise its power in imposing a penalty on the contractor or exempting
him therefrom. If the administration, prima facia, exempts the contractor for
Particular reasons, it is legal that the administration can re-impose a penalty
for delay if there is a considerable consideration 4
(ii) Decisions of the Egyptian Cassation Court (civil and commercial
circuits) :
The cassation court directly applied stipulations of article 224 of the civil law.
The court held in some of the leading cases that "in the light of article (224)
of the Egyptian civil law if there is penalty clause in the contract , damages
are presumed unless the debtor proved the opposite or that stipulated
compensation at the contract exceeded the actual loss". 56
The court held in recent cases that "the contracting parties can fix a pre-
1 Legal opinion (106), issued 22/1/1992, session 19/1/1992 file No. (54/1/291).
2 Legal opinion (364), issued 25/5/2003, session 16/4/2003 file No. (54/1/403).
3 Legal opinion No. (528) dated 3/6/1991, session 5/6/1991,file(37/2/419).
4 Legal opinion (668) issued 25/8/2004, Session 21/4/2004, file No. (47/2/449),In the
meaning see: Dr Mohamed A M Ismail ,Supra, I.C.L.R, Vol. 26,Part 4 ,Oct. 2009.
5 Egyptian Cassation Court, case 415, year 46, 13/2/1980
6 Egyptian Cassation Court, case 26, year 38, 18/12/1973.
30

--- Page 28 ---
estimated compensation for damages as a result for non performance of any
of the stipulated obligations If the debtor proved that the pre-estimated
compensation exceeded the actual loss or that he performed some of his
obligations court shall reduce compensation to be adequate to actual loss". '
The same principles still adopted by the court until present.
Conclusions:
The judicial review of the State Council courts and General Assembly for
Legal Opinion (Fatwa) and Legislation, at its most optimistic scenario, can
exempt the contractor in certain cases stipulated at the Egyptian State Council
practices. The contractor can be exempted from the penalty for delay in case of
force majeure or fundamental default, by the state, which exempts the contractor
from his obligations and, consequently, from the penalty for delay. This is not
contrary to the punitive nature of the penalty for delay clause as this clause
is always a penalty clause. Egyptian administrative courts recognize penalty
clauses in administrative contracts, whether national or international, and
consider them legal.
If there are no damages, consequently, there is no loss to the state; the
contractor can be exempt from the pre-estimated sum stipulated by the
Procurement Law of (1998) or the contract, only in case of a legal opinion from
the state council.
These current changes in the last decade are direct result of globalization.
Transfer of the legal culture From common law countries is of great
importance as the administrative contract theory needs more modifications
and enhancements.
Globalization plays a significant role in changing some of the main features
of this theory to be adopted through drafting international public works
agreements with Private foreign entities .It is a new trend in the civil law legal
culture.
It is strongly recommended that there is an essential need for a legislative
reform of article (23) of the State Procurement Law of (1998) to reduce the
cap of the fine to be less than 10% of the total value of the contract price. It is
fundamental to propose that the penalty shall be calculated according to the
actual loss and no pre-estimated and fixed sum by legislations and regulations
shall be applied as it exceeds the actual loss.
The penalty can even reflect the substantial loss to the state public utility
1 Egyptian Cassation Court, cases 1859, 2444, 2447, year (70), 12/6/2001
Volume - 1
القَانوينَ
31

--- Page 29 ---
and be calculated pursuant to this loss which may be less than the actual loss in
many cases. In Common law jurisdictions as stated above the Anglo- American
case law considers liquidated damages genuine pre-estimated compensation
that should be estimated according to the actual loss ( Damages). In some cases
the contractor can be exempted from the penalty if the substantial completion
was achieved in a reasonable time and the state can start utilization of the
completed part on the stipulated purpose. Despite the fact that some recent
cases applied liquidated damages clause and considered it valid, the latter view
considered the stipulated sum adequate to the actual loss. The clause was not
applied as a penalty clause at any circumstances.
Among other difficulties which need to be considered is that in accordance
with the principles of the administrative courts of the State Council ' a contractor,
in certain cases, cannot suspend or terminate works if the administration
terminates his payments. He cannot claim to stop execution until he gets his
Payments from the state. In that case, the administration applies article (23) on
the penalty for delay if he does not achieve final completion at the stipulated
date despite the fact that he is not paid his payments by the administration.
This critical situation needs a legislative reform of the state procurement
law No. 89 of 1998 as termination of payments is an example of a fundamental
default (breach of contract), by the state, pursuant to the Egyptian civil code .
Few exceptions to this principal by Egyptian state council courts considered
direct result of globalization.
Contrary to this concept, in civil and commercial transactions, pursuant
to article (161) of the Egyptian civil legislation, if one party to a contract failed
to fulfill his obligations, the other party can suspend or terminate performance.
Moreover, the proposed legislative reform must consider the dynamic
relationship in the international public works agreements which differ from
static relationships in other transactions. This dynamic relationship is related
to many factors such as contract price, total sum stipulated as penalty, the
extent to which it is adequate to the loss, currency depreciation, inflation rate,
contractual relations with lending banks, insurance institutions and the change
in raw material prices in developing countries, which may change contract price
under different circumstances.
1 Contractor cannot stop or suspend performance of works at any circumstances even if
the state fails to make payments, in that case the penalty for delay is applicable |Supreme
Administrative Court- case 5959, year (44), 26/1/2001] In very rare occasions the court allowed
contractor to stop performance if the state delayed his payments [i.e case 4483, year (41), session
6/5/1997]. In some other (rare) cases the contractor stipulates at the contract that the period of
late payments shall be added to the completion date. This clause is valid as it is not contrary to
mandatory rules of the state procurement law. An old Legal opinion confirming that in some
cases the contract provisions can supersede procurement law . Legal opinion for the General
Assembly (fatwa)No (100), session 20/3/1985 ,file(47/2/350).
32

--- Page 30 ---
In conclusion, the penal nature of the penalty for delay clauses in the
state procurement law under Egyptian law No. 89 of 1998 and the executive
regulations thereof need a legislative reform of the fine stipulated by the state
as well as a reconsideration of many other aspects.
Modifications and enhancements to the legal regime governing
international public works agreements will increase foreign direct investments
(FDI) in the construction sector and infrastructure projects. New types of
infrastructure agreements began to appear such as (Public-Private Partnership
agreements) PPPs in France since 2004 (by decree No 559 of 2004,in June the
17th, which was affirmed by the French Conseil d'Etat in 29 /10/2004famous
decision)' and currently in Egypt since 2005 under the Egyptian Ministry
of Finance supervision ( PPP Central Unit). Both systems recognized the
latter mechanism following the English legal system which started this legal
concept in financing, building operating public utilities since 1989. Moreover,
PPPs can assist in developed countries in climate change mitigation as legal
systems in these countries stipulate that newly established projects must
adopt certain technologies friendly to environment.2It is worth mentioning
that the legislation of the PPP transactions in Egypt is not considering these
transactions administrative contracts and consequently are not subject to the
state procurement law, concessions law No 129 of 1947 or natural resources
concessions law No 61 of 1958.
Civil law concepts and mechanisms in the administrative contract need
complete revision and the judicial review by the State Council courts will
advance as a result of the legislative reform.
Globalization is playing a significant role as a tool to implement the
abovementioned legal views and facts to encourage private foreign entities
entering into infrastructure agreements with states as well as financial
institutions.
Finally, this legislative reform shall assist arbitral processes in international
construction contracts arbitration between developing countries and foreign
contractors. The arbitral tribunal in applying substantive law to facts has to
determine first if the contract is an administrative contract and the fixed sum is
1 wwW.consiel-etat-fr/jurispd/index-ac.10442.html
2 See: Dr Mohamed AM Ismail, Legal Globalization and PPPs in Egypt "an analytical
and comparative perspective on the current legislative and judicial modifications to and
enhancements of the administrative contractual regime on PPP transactions" European PPP
Law Review, Germany, March 2010(in English) and also by the same author: Public Economic
Law and New International Administrative Contract, El Halabi Publishing Co., Beirut, 2010,
PP 175-185.Geoffray Hamilton, FDI, the Global Crises and sustainable recovery working paper
for public private partnership and FDI as means of securing a sustainable recovery, paper
submitted to the fourth Columbia International Investment Conference , Columbia University,
Nov.5-6 ,2009. Dr Ragab Mahmoud, PPP agreements, Dar El Nahda el Arabia,2007.
Volume -1
القَانوينَ
33

--- Page 31 ---
a penalty and is applicable regardless to any existing loss or it is a commercial
contract and consequently the pre-estimated compensation is subject to the
arbitral tribunal review to be adequate to the actual loss. This is the current
situation at the Egyptian Legal System where a legislative reform shall establish
new concepts to be applied in both arbitration and litigation.
34

