--- Page 1 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
by
Dr. Mohamed Fouad Elhariry
Legal Adviser for the Ministry of Finance, Kingdom of Bahrain
Vice-president of at the Egyptian 'Conseil D'Etat'
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION
A- The concept of industrial
design
B- The importance of the legal
protection
C- The distinction between
industrial and artistic designs
PART ONE:
International overview on the
requirements for protection of
Industrial Designs
Section one:
The protection of Industrial
Designs under the Paris
Convention
Section two:
The protection of Industrial
Designs under the Berne
Convention
Section three:
The protection of Industrial
Designs under the TRIPs
Agreement
requirements for protection of
Industrial Designs
Section one:
The requirements for protection
of Industrial Designs under the
E.C. Design Directive
A- Protectable subject matters
A.1. Definition of design
A.2. Definition of product
B- Excluded subject matters
C- Protection requirements
C.1. Novelty
C.2. Individual character
C.3. Visibility
Section two:
The requirements for protection
of Industrial Designs under the
Egyptian Law
A- Definition of industrial design
and model
B- Excluded subject matters
C- Protection requirements
C.1. Special appearance of
novelty
C.2. Industrial applicability
PART TWO:
The national application of the
CONCLUSION
BIBLIOGRAPHY

--- Page 2 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
INTRODUCTION
This part of the paper will focus on the definition of industrial design,
the importance of industrial design legal protection and the distinction
between industrial and artistic designs.
A. The concept of industrial design:
There are many definitions of industrial design. One of these definitions
is that an industrial design is an applied art whereby the acsthetics and
usability of mass-produced products may be improved for marketability and
production. Also, it is detined as the process of taking something from its
existing state and moving it to a preferred state 1.
In addition, according to the International Council of Societies of
Industrial Designs (ICSID) an industrial design is a creative activity whose
aim is to establish the multi-taceted qualities ot objects, processes, services
and their systems in whole life cycles. Therefore, design is considered the
central factor of innovative humanization of technologies and the crucial
factor of cultural and economic exchange 2.
In my view industrial design may also be defined as an external appearance
of an article produced by industry or handicraft. So, a hidden feature of a
product can not be protected as industrial design. Moreover, it is a concrete
intellectual creation which can be perceived by visual sense. This creation is
the subject of design protection.
The design may consist of two-dimensional features or three-dimensional
features. A two-dimensional design means an arrangement of lines or colors
laid on a flat surface in order to produce a visual effect, whereas a three-
dimensional design means forms which stand out from a flat surface. A two-
dimensional design can be distinguished from a three-dimensional design
in that the former implies a flat surface, whereas the latter occupies space. In
fact, this practical distinction has no legal significance 1.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Industrial__design#Definition_ofindustrial design.
The Internarional Council of Societies of Industrial Designs (ICSID) is a global organizarion
promotes better design around the world. It includes over 150 members in more than
50 countries, representing an estimated 150,000 designers. Irs members are professional
associations, promotional societies, educational institutions, government bodies, corporations
and institutions, Which aim to contribute to the development of the profession of industrial
design.
D. COHEN, The International Protection of Designs, Kluwer Law International, London, 2000,
p.1.
6

--- Page 3 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
It should be noted that the industrial design is related only to the shape
of an article. It must not serve the function of that article. In other words,
designs which are dictated solely by the function which the article is to
perform shall be excluded from protection 2.
However, there is an inherent relationship between the industrial design
and the function. On the one hand, design possibilities are limited by
function. At a certain stages, extravagance or fantasy in design can impede
function. On the other hand, a design can facilitate function. For example,
certain designs of automobiles take advantage of aerodynamic and decrease
air resistance to increase speed 3.
The international conventions which govern the intellectual property
rights do not provide a specific definition for what is meant by the concept
of industrial design. However, national legal systems provide definitions of
industrial design.
The Directive 98/71/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
on the legal protection of designs defines design as the appearance of the
Whole or a part of a product resulting from the features of, in particular, the
lines, contours, colors, shape, texture and/or materials of the product itself
and/or its ornamentation 4.
According to the Egyptian IP law, a design is any composition of lines or
any three-dimensional form whether or not associated with colors provided
that such composition or form gives a special appearance of novelty and is
industrially applicable 5.
B. The importance of the legal protection:
The legal protection of industrial design is very important to the owner
of design, the consumers, and the economic development.
When an industrial design is protected, the right holder can exclude and
prevent any unauthorized copying or imitation of his protected design by
1. WIPO Intellectual Property Handbook, Industrial Design and Integrated Circuits, WIPO
Publication, 2004, p.114.
2. F.MABBOTT-TH. COTTIER-F. GURRY, International Intellectual Property in an Integrated
World Economy, Aspen Publishers, Wolters Kluwer, New York, 2007, P. 559.
3. The Directive 98/71/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13th October,
1998, on the legal protection of designs, which came into force on 24th December, 1998.
4. The Egyptian Law on the Protection of Intellectual Property Rights No. 82 of 2002, 2nd
June, 2002, which came into force on 3rd June, 2002.
Volume 1 - Danoniya
7

--- Page 4 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
third parties. This assists to ensure a fair return on investment.
Consumers often take the visual appeal of a product into consideration
when choosing between different products. This is especially true when the
market offers variety of products with the same function and price. In these
cases, the aesthetic appeal of a product is a decisive factor in determining
the consumer's choice since design makes a product attractive and adds to
its commercial value.
In fact, the importance of the legal protection of industrial design comes
from the crucial role of designs in increasing product marketability and
enhancing fair competition within a market-based economy.
The legal protection of design provides incentive for creativity in this
field, and promotes the honest trade practices in the market which, of course,
benefit consumers and enhance the welfare of the society at large.
Protecting industrial designs spurs economic development by
encouraging creativity in the industrial and manufacturing sectors. Also,
it contributes to increasing commercial activities and export of national
products in both developed and developing countries.
C. The distinction between industrial and artistic de-
signs:
The basis of the distinction between industrial and artistic designs is
the functionality of the design. The purpose for which the design is made
identifies the nature of design. Therefore, an industrial design is a creation
intended for industrial use or exploitation, ie. which is to be used for
practical purposes such as clothing and furniture. So, industrial designs
must be intended for mass production.
An artistic design is a creation has only a decorative purpose without
Iny industrial aim. This design has no end other than to be looked at anc
lamred such as panting and sculpture
The distinction between industrial and artistic designs plays an important
role in countres which protect designs by one legal method onlv, either by
specific legislation or copyright law, because this distinction defines the
type of protection regime which can apply to designs. Where a design is
considered to be industrial, it will be protected by a specific legislation under
which registration formalities are required. Whereas if a design is deemed as
artistic, it will be protected only by copyright law under which the protection
is granted automatically.
8

--- Page 5 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
However, the distinction between industrial and artistic designs is not
important in countries which adopt the principle of unity of art. Under this
principle, a design can be protected at the option of creator, alternatively or
cumulatively, through copyright law and/or specific design law regardless of
the purpose of the design 1.
Additionally, there are countries protect industrial design by copyright
law, beside protection by specific design law, if the artistic features of this
design prevail over its functionalitv.
PART ONE
International overview on the requirements for protection of
Industrial Designs
This part of the paper will be devoted to explain how the international
conventions of the intellectual property rights, namely, the Paris Conventior
for the Protection of Industrial Property 2, the Berne Convention for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works 3 and the Agreement on Trade-
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) 4 , regulate the
protection of industrial designs and what are the requirements for such
protection.
Section one
The protection of Industrial Designs under the Paris Convention
Industrial designs are included in the scope of industrial property covered
by Article 1(2) of the Paris Convention.
Article 5Bof the Paris Convention provides that « The protection ofindustrial
designs shall not, under any circumstances, be subject to any forfeiture, either by
1. D. COHEN, The Internacional Protection of Designs, supra at note 3, pp. 2-4.
Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, Paris, 20th March, 1883, which
came into force on 7ch July, 1884, WIPO lists 173 contracting countries as of November,
.3
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, Berne, 9th Septembet,
1886, which came into force on 5th December, 1887, WIPO lists 164 contracting countries
as of November, 2008.
4. Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, 15th April, 1994.
Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, Annex 1C.
Volume 1 - Danoniya

--- Page 6 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
reason of failure to work or by reason of importation of Articles corresponding to
those which are protected.»
Article SD of the Paris Convention provides that «No indication or
mention of the patent, of the utility model, of the registration of the
trademark, or of the deposit of the industrial design, shall be required upon
the goods as a condition of recognition of the right to protection.»
Article Squinquies of the Paris Convention stipulates that «Industrial
designs shall be protected in all the countries of the Union.»
According to Article 5B of the Paris Convention, the legal protection of
right holder can not be subject to any forfeiture, either by reason of failure
to work or by reason of import of products corresponding to those whicl
are protected
This provision prohibits that rights conferred by industrial designs be
declared forfeited as a result of either failure to work or importation of
corresponding products. In contrast, such a possibility exists in relation
to utility models and patents in accordance with Article SA of the Paris
Convention 1.
The expression «forfeiture» must be understood to include any measure
which would terminate the protection of a design on the ground referred to.
These measures may be repeal or revocation or annulment or cancellation.
The expression «failure to work» is understood as meaning the failure
to manufacture the products representing or incorporating the design
2. However, the contracting countries have discretion to define what they
understand by that expression.
Article SD of the Paris Convention states that the recognition of the
right to protection does not require that there is an indication to the deposit
of the industrial designs on the product. This rule was introduced in 1925
and extended in 1934 to other industrial property rights which are patents,
utility models and trademarks .
I think that the Paris Convention opened the door, by that Article, to
the contracting countries to adopt the rule whereby the deposit of design
A. KUR, TRIPs and Design Protection in (F.K. Beier & G. Schricker eds.), From GATT to
TRIPS: The Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual property Rights, Studies in
Intellectual Property and Copyright Law, 1996, 141 ff, at 145.
.2
G. H. C. BODENHAUSEN, Guide to the application of the Paris Convention for the
Protection of Industrial Property, BIRPI, WIPO publication, 2004, p. 74.
10

--- Page 7 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
application is sufficient to grant protection. Indeed, the deposit system
is criticized because it does not require national IP offices to examine the
novelty ot a design betore granting protection. This way of protection does
not encourage the creativity in the held of the industral designs since the
applicant knows that the novelty of the claimed design will not be examined
In practice, this system creates a lot of problems among the comperitors in
the market.
Article Squinquies of the Parts Convention states that the protectior
of industrial designs must be provided in all the countries of the Union.
However, it does not explain how protection is to be granted.
This provision should not be interpreted so as to mean that the contracting
countries have to protect industrial designs by sui generis legislation, rather
it is allowed to every country of the Union to protect industrial designs
under copyright legislation or as protection against unfair competition.
In addition, it was said that Article Squinquies may be considered
self-executing in countries which accept this concept, consequently, the
interested parties can directly invoke that provision in court .
According to the previous articles, it could be stated that the Paris
Convention obliges all contracting countries to protect industrial designs.
However, it does not specify a special legal system for protecting them, so
each contracting country has freedom to adopt any legal protection regime
in its domestic legislation in order to implement its international obligation
set out by the Paris Convention.
Section two
The protection of Industrial Designs under the Berne Convention
Article 2(7) of the Berne Convention provides that «Subject to the
provisions of Article 7(4) of this Convention, it shall be a matter tor legislation
in the countries of the Union to determine the extent of the application of
their laws to works of applied art and industrial designs and models, as
well as the conditions under which such works, designs and models shall
be protected. Works protected in the country of origin solely as designs and
models shall be entitled in another country of the Union only to such special
protection as is granted in that country to designs and models; however, if
no such special protection is granted in that country, such works shall be
protected as artistic works.»
The purpose of the Berne Convention regarding industrial designs is to
regulate their protection on the basis of copyright. This issue was topic of
Volume 1 - Danoniya 11

--- Page 8 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
heated discussions during the various revisions of the Berne Convention.
The paragraph (7) of Article 2 of the Berne Convention governs this question.
This paragraph sets out two essential principles in this area.
First, the choice of the method of protection applicable to industrial
designs is a matter of discretion of the contracting countries. Therefore,
the national legislature of the contracting states can determine firstly the
application of that protection 1.
The Berne Convention does not oblige the contracting countries to
protect industrial designs under copyright. They can protect them exclusivel)
by a legislation specific to industrial designs, or cumulatively, and without
any restriction, by a copyright law and specific legislation, or cumulatively,
but with certain reservations, by a copyright law and specific legislation.
The second principle of Article 2(7) of the Berne Convention states that if
a work of art applied to industry is protected only by a specific legislation to
industrial designs in its country of origin, a national of another contracting
country can not claim the protection of copyright for this design in other
countries of the Union.
On the other side, if a work of art applied to industry is protected by
copyright in its country of origin, a designer can claim this protection in
other countries of the Union if they accept the copyright protection, In other
words, a work which is not protected by copyright in its country of origin
can not benefit from such protection in another country of the Union 2.
The importance of this principle appears in practical applications to
grant copyright protection for industrial designs. In these situations, courts
must firstly determine whether its national system allows for protection of
industrial designs by copyright if so, secondly, it must determine whether
this way of protection is also available in the country of origin.
Denis Cohen thinks that the principle of reciprocity contained in Article
2(7) of the Berne Convention must be viewed as an exception to the general
principle of national treatment set out in the Convention. Consequently, the
principle of reciprocity should be strictly interpreted 1.
It is worthy to note that Article 7(4) of the Berne Convention provides
hat the determination of the term of protection of the works of appliec
art, where they are protected under copyright, is a matter for the national
1. A. KUR, TRIPs and Design Protection in (F.K. Beier & G. Schricker eds.), From GAT'T to
TRIPS: The Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual properry Rights, supra at
.2
note 12, P.145, Footnote No. 24.
G. H. C. BODENHAUSEN, Guide to the application of che Paris Convention for the
Protection of Industrial Property, supra at note 13, p. 86.
12

--- Page 9 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
legislations of the contracting countries; however this Article states that the
minimum term of protection shall be twenty-five years from the making of
such works.
Section three
The protection of Industrial Designs under the TRIPs Agreement
Article 25 of the TRIPs Agreement provides that «Requirements for
Protection.
1. Members shall provide for the protection of independently created
industrial designs that are new or original. Members may provide that
designs are not new or original if they do not significantly differ from
known designs or combinations of known design features. Members
may provide that such protection shall not extend to designs dictated
essentially by technical or functional considerations.
.2
Each Member shall ensure that requirements for securing protection
for textile designs, in particular in regard to any cost, examination or
publication, do not unreasonably impair the opportunity to seek and
obtain such protection. Members shall be free to meet this obligation
through industrial design law or through copyright law.»
Article 25(1) of the TRIPs Agreement is devoted to define the requirements
for protection of industrial designs in the WTO Member States. It reflects
the mixed nature of industrial designs as works of applied art which are
subject to copyright protection, and as external aesthetic shape of industrial
products which is subject to industrial property.
This provision obliges the Member States to require that designs must
be independently created to deserve protection regardless of whether they
adopt a copyright protection or an industrial property registration system.
In addition, they are obliged to require that designs must be new or original;
yet, this Article does not permit the accumulation of requirements 1.
Article 25(1) uses expression «independently created» as well as words
«new» and «original».
Industrial design must be independently created since it is a fundamental
condition for protection. An industrial design is considered independently
created when a designer, without knowing about the work of another
designer, produces a similar or identical design 2.
There is no specific definition in the TRIPs Agreement for the words
D. COHEN, The International Protection of Designs, supra at note 3, pp. 113-114.
Volume 1 - @anoniya
13

--- Page 10 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
«new» and «original». However, the use ot these words is crucial in the held
of protection of industrial designs because word «new» has connotations of
novelty which are well understood within the context of patent law, while
«original» is a word which is rooted in copyright 3.
Novelry is a concept of industrial property and is always measured in
connection with a specific date. It is an essential objective condition for
the protection of industrial property. Alchough the TRIPs Agreement does
not specify the kind of novelty required to protect industrial designs, most
national legislations require worldwide novelty to grant protection.
Generally, the notion of originality means that a work must express
personal intellectual creation of an author. In other words, there must be
a personal link between the work and the creator, so it is intertwined with
independent creation. It is deemed as an essential subjective condition for
the protection of copyright.
So, I can state that the TRIPs Agreement considers that independence
of creation is a mandatory requirement for protection of industrial designs;
additionally, Member States may choose between novelty and originality as
a second requirement for such protection.
It should be noted that although industrial designs are intended for
industrial use, the TRIPs Agreement does not require that designs must be
industrially applicable as a requirement for protection.
Moreover, the TRIPs Agreement does not prevent Member States from
adopting additional substantive requirements for protection, so all national
legislations require that designs mnust not be contrary to public order and
morality.
According to the second sentence of the text of Article 25(1), Member
States may decide that an industrial design is not protectable where it does
not significantly differ from known designs or combinations of known design
features since, in this case, industrial design lacks novelty or originality.
The third sentence of Article 25(1) allows Member States to exclude
the technical or functional designs from scope of protection of industrial
designs. The rationale of this is that if a design for an article is dictated
›urely by the function which the article is intended to pertorm, protectior
or that design would have the effect of excluding all other manufacturer:
from producing items intended to perform the same function 1.
.1
N. PIRES DE CARVALHO, The TRIPS Regime of Trademarks and Designs, Kluwer Law
International, London, 2006, p. 402, para 25.8.
2. Id, p. 396, para 25.3.
.3
C. M. CORREA-A. A. YUSUF, Intellectual Property and Incernational Trade: che TRIPS
Agreement, Kluwer Law International B V, The Netherlands, 2008, p. 223.
14

--- Page 11 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
Article 25(2) of the TRIPs Agreement provides requirement for securing
Protection for textile designs, in particular in regard to any costs, examination
or publication, do not unreasonably impair the opportunity to seek and
obtain such protection.
This provision can be implemented by industrial design law or copyright.
It applies only to textile designs. No such provision is found in articles of
trademarks or patent protection even though the expense of the latter has
long been a source of complaint 2.
PART TWO
The national application of the requirements for protection of In-
dustrial Designs
Part two of this paper will shed the light on what the national legislature
requires to protect industrial designs in Europe and Egypt.
This part is subdivided into two sections, the first will explain the
protectable subject matters, the excluded subject matters from design
protection and the protection requirements under the Directive 98/71/
EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the legal protection
of designs (the Design Directive). The second section will preview how the
Egyptian Law on the Protection of Intellectual Property Rights No. 82 of
2002 regulates the above mentioned elements.
Section one
The requirements for protection of Industrial Designs under the
E.C. Design Directive
The main aim of the Design Directive is to harmonize registered
protection for industrial design across European Union Member States.
So, it establishes the basic structure of European Union members› design
registration systems 3.
A- Protectable subject matters:
To identity the protectable subject matters, it is appropriate to analyze the
definitions of the key terms used in the Design Directive which are «design»
and «product». Everything that satisfies these concepts is considered
1. WIPO Inrellectual Property Handbook, Industrial Design and Integrated Circuits, supra at.
CM.CORREA-A. A YESET, Inrelicetual Property and International Trade: the TRIPS
Agreement, supra at note 21, p.224.
.3
http://www.fryer.com/eudedrp1.hcm
Volume 1 - @anoniya
15

--- Page 12 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
protectable subject matter.
A.1. Definition of design:
Article 1(a) of the Design Directive defines a «design» as the appearance
of the whole or a part of a product results from features of, in particular, the
lines, contours, colors, shape, texture and/or materials of the product itself
and/or its ornamentation. This definition covers two-dimensional designs
which are called «designs», and three-dimensional designs which are called
«models» 1.
The expression «appearance of the whole or a part of a product» refers
to any element which can be perceived by the human senses. It seems to me
that ideas and concepts are not covered by that definition since it focuses on
the external aspects of a product.
There is constancy in the jurisprudence on that the word «appearance»
covers all visual and tactile features of a product since Recital (11) of the
Design Directive Indicates that protection is conterred by registration for
those design teatures ot a product whch are shown visibly in an applicat1on,
and Recital (13) of the same Directive says that assessment of individual
character relies on viewing of an informed user to the design. Furthermore,
it is clear that the European legislature intends to exclude sound, taste and
smell features from the definition of a «design».
In addition, it is not required that a design must be attractive or have
aesthetic quality to be qualihed tor protection because Recital (14) of the
Design Directive provides that «... whereas it is understood that this does
not entail that a design must have an aesthetic quality...»
The use of expression «in particular» let me state that the current
definition is very broad since it encompasses non-exhaustive list of features
whereby the appearance may be assessed. Every design which meets that
definition can be protected.
A.2. Definition of product:
Article 1(b) of the Design Directive defines a «product» as any industrial
ot handicraft item including, inter alia, component parts, packaging, get-
up, graphic symbols, and typographic typefaces, but excluding computer
programs.
.1
D. MUSKER, Community Design Law-Principles and Practice, Sweet & Maxwell, London,
2002, p. 12, para 1-012.
16

--- Page 13 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
This definition is broad enough to include all items which can be
produced by industry or handicratt except computer programs. It covers all
kinds ot two-dimensional and three-dimensional products. However, it was
not indented to go so far as to cover living spaces, e.g. landscape design. The
protection for these is to be left to copyright 1.
The Design Directive provides for some examples for protected products.
Component parts are deemed protectable where they are intended to be
assembled into a complex product. The Design Directive defines a complex
›roduct as a product which 1s composed of multiple components which car
be replaced permitting disassembly and reassembly of the product. Graphic
symbol is something which is neither letter nor number, e.g. «@» which is
used in Internet domain names. Typographic typefaces mean way ot letter
or number designs which are used in writing on computer,e.g. Times New
Roman and Arial.
It is important to know that the Design Directive does not require that
a design exhibits industrial application or some quality of repeatability. It is
Said that the European stance is appropriate as there is no justifiable reason
to single out any one mode of manufacture for protection above all other
means of manutacture 2.
As the Design Directive does not deal with matters concerning application
and registration formalities, it is evident that what is protected is a design for
any product, in other words, a design does not necessitate being associated
with a specific product. This principle affects the assessment of novelty and
individual character requirements as we will discuss below.
It should be noted that the protection is conferred on the design and
not the product. Thus a registered design is not tied to a specific industrial
product but remains protected regardless of the product to which it is
applied 3.
B- Excluded subject matters:
Excluded subject matters are exceptions to registrability. According tc
Articles 1(b), 7 and 8 of the Design Directive, four main types of subject
matters are excluded from design protection, namely, computer programs,
1. Id, p. 16, para 1-019.
.2
.3
U. Suthersanen, Design Law in Europe, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 2000, P. 30, para 6-010.
K.A. LEVIN-M.B. RICHMAN, A Survey of Industrial Design Protection in the EU and the
US, in 25 EIPR 2003, 111 fF., at 111.
Volume 1 - @anoniya 17

--- Page 14 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
designs solely dictated by technical function, designs of interconnections
and designs contrary to public order or morality.
First, Article 1(b) of the Design Directive excludes expressly computer
programs from the definition of a product; accordingly they are not
protected under design protection. The reason of this exclusion is that
computer programs are decided to be protected by copyright in accordance
with the provisions of the Directive 91/250/EEC on the legal protection of
computer programs 1. However, specific graphic designs, such as computer
icons, will qualify as products.
Second, Article 7(1) of the Design Directive stipulates that «1. A design
right shall not subsist in features of appearance of a product which are solely
dictated by its technical function...»
Features of a design can not be registered if they are exclusively dictated
by the function of a product. Recital (14) of the Design Directive makes clear
that the reasoning of this exclusion is to avoid hampering technological
innovation within the European market. In practice, the refusal to register
a design on the ground of technical function will arise where such design
includes new technology or functionality invented or designed by the
designer.
The word «dictated» could be interpreted to mean that a feature of a
design is dictated solely by function if it can not be made any other way tc
pertorm the tunction, in other words «dictated» has a mandatory meaning.
Also, it could mean that if a designer thought only about the function,
in other words, «dictated» has a causative meaning. In fact, there is no
harmonization among Member States regarding these interpretations, that
is, Some national courts adopt the hrst interpretation whereas other national
courts take the second one 2.
It seems to me that expression «technical function» should be interpreted
to mean the principal function of the product, that is, the main function for
performing which the product is manufactured, because this view agrees with
the rational behind the current exclusion which is to allow the competitors
to enter the relevant market as well as to promote the competition in supply
of functional specifications.
1. The Council Directive 91/250/EEC of 14th May, 1991, on the legal protection of computer
programs, which came into force on 16th May, 1991.
2. D. MUSKER, Community Design Law-Principles and Practice, supra at note 25, pp. 45-46,
Para 1-079.
18

--- Page 15 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
In addition, it should be noted that the Design Directive follows to some
extent the exclusion provided for by Article 25(1) of the TRIPs Agreement
that allows Member States to exclude the technical or functional designs
from protection of industrial designs.
Third, Article 7(2), (3) of the Design Directive provide that «2. A design
right shall not subsist in features of appearance of a product which must
necessarily be reproduced in their exact form and dimensions in order to
permit the product in which the design is incorporated or to which it is
applied to be mechanically connected to or placed in, around or against
another product so that either product may perform its function.
3. Norwithstanding. paragraph 2, a design, right shall, under the
conditions set out in Articles 4and 5, subsists in a design serving the purpose
of allowing multiple assembly or connection of mutually interchangeable
Products within a modular systen1.»
According to Article 7(2) of the Design Directive, interconnecting
features of a design are excluded from design protection. An interconnecting
feature is any feature of the designed product which enables that product
to be mechanically connected to or placed in, around or against another
product, so that either product may perform its function. This exclusion
applies to features which permit a precise ht between two products as 1n
plug and socket 1.
This provision is concerned primarily with the spare parts within motor
vehicle sector. For example, features of an exhaust pipe connecting with the
underside of the car will be subject to the current exclusion. Additionally,
the wording «mechanically connected» makes evident that this provision is
limited to mechanical interconnection.
The aim of the mechanical interface exception
is to promote
interoperability of products of different makes by not extending protection
to the design of mechanical fittings. Thus an industrial design which
must be reproduced in exact form and dimension in order to mechanically
connect to another product is not registrable. However, this exception does
not apply if a design allows multiple assembly or connection of mutuallv
interchangeable products within a modular system for example, stacking
chairs 2.
Article 7(3) of the Design Directive removes features within a modular
system from the interconnection exclusion clause. So, this exclusion does
1. U. Suthersanen, Design Law in Europe, supra at note 27, p. 36, para 6-030
2. KA. LEVIN-M.B. RICHMAN, A Survey of Industrial Design Protection in the EU and the
US, supra at note 28, p. 113.
Volume 1 - @anoniya 19

--- Page 16 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
not apply to Lego toy and interconnecting elements of a toy car assembly
kits and the like.
It is said that one way of rationalizing the exclusion of modular products
is that the assembling together of such products is not just an ancillary to
enable the products to fulfill their function since assembly is the primary
function of such products 1.
In fact, the current paragraph was drafted as a result of successful lobbying
of the manufacturers of such products on the European legislature. This
special drafting for benefit of certain businesses is criticized by Professor
Marco Ricolfi who thinks chat it affirms that industrial designs are over
protected.
It must be noticed that although Article 7 of the Design Directive excludes
design right from subsisting in certain features of a design, namely, solely
functional and must-fit features, these features are still part of the design and
are hence presumably taken into account in assessing the overall appearance
of the design for scope of protection and for individual character 2.
In order to avoid any potential misinterpretation of the above mentioned
Paragraphs ot Article 7 of the Design Directive, David Musker said, correctly,
that Article 7(1) is concerned with features which allows a product to perform
its function, whereas Article 7(2) concerning with features which allow two
products to be connected so that either product may pertorm its function,
In other words, features on product A allowing product B to function 3.
Fourth, Article 8 of the Design Directive stipulates that «A design right
shall not subsist in a design which is contrary to public policy or to accepted
principles of morality.»
Accordingly, a design that is contrary to public order or to accepted
principles of morality is excluded from protection. Indeed, the concept of
public order and morality differs from country to country. Moreover, it
liffers within a given country from time to time in accordance with th
›revailing ethical and cultural considerations. So. the inclusion of abov
mentioned provision has potential to upset the unitary concept of European
design law because it is so difficult to set out unified standards for public
policy or morality in all European Member States.
D. MUSKER, Community Design Law-Principles and Practice, supra at note 25, p. 51, para
2. ld, p. 41, para 1-072.
3. Id, p. 43, para 1-076.
20

--- Page 17 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
In addition to the above mentioned excluded subject matters, Article
11 of the Design Directive allows each Member State to adopt additional
Trounds for refusal of registration. These optional grounds include refusing
egistration If a design Incorporates a prior registered or unregisterec
trademark, or constitutes unauthorized use of a copyrighted work, or
constitutes improper use of well known trademark, or is not entitled to be
registered under the law of the Member State concerned.
C- Protection requirements:
Article 3 of the Design Directive provides that «1. Member States shall
protect designs by registration, and shall confer exclusive rights upon their
holders in accordance with the provisions of this Directive.
2. A design shall be protected by a design right to the extent that it is new
and has individual character.
3. A design applied to or incorporated in a product which constitutes a
component part of a complex product shall only be considered to be new
and to have individual character:
(a) if the component part, once it has been incorporated into the complex
product, remains visible during normal use of the latter, and
(b) to the extent that those visible features of the component part fulfill
in themselves the requirements as to novelty and individual character.
4. «Normal use» within the meaning of paragraph (3)(a) shall mean use
by the end user, excluding maintenance, servicing or repair work.»
The Design Directive requires that a design must comply with two main
requirements to be conferred legal protection, that is;, a design must be new
and have individual character. The definitions of novelty and individual
character requirements are obligatory since the European legislature intends
to create harmonization in national laws of European Member States.
In addition, visibility criterion must be met, as an additional condition,
only to protect component parts. The disclosure, the prior art and the
exceptions to the prior ait have the same concepts concerning with novelty
and individual character requirements. All these principles will be discussed
below.
C.1. Novelty:
Article 4 of the Design Directive provides that «A design shall be
considered new if no identical design has been made available to the public
›efore the date of filing of the application for registration or, it priority is
claimed, the date of priority. Designs shall be deemed to be identical if their
features differ only in immaterial details.»
The principle is that a design must be new to be protected. It is considered
Volume 1 - @anoniya 21

--- Page 18 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
new if there is no identical design was made available to the public before
the filing date of the application for registration or, if priority is claimed, the
date of priority.
The assessment of novelty depends on an objective comparison between
a design for which registration is applied and any existing design in the prior
art, the former design has to differ in material details to be deemed new.
What will be immaterial is a matter of the courts. This comparison is carried
out by expert's eye not by end user.
Article 6 of the Design Directive defines the prior art for the purpose of
neasurement of novelty and individual character requirements. The wordin{
«made available to the public» means that if a design has been publishec
tollowing registration or otherwise, or exhibited, used in trade or otherwise
disclosed. So, the prior art must be a «design» as that is now defined, but it
can be a design for any kind of item, and this includes most forms of artistic
work in a copyright sense. 1.
Consequently, the novelty of a design could be defeated by a prior design
of a product other than the product to which the claimed design will be
applied since the Design Directive does not require that design registration
must be associated with a specific product.
Certain exceptions to the prior art are set out by Article 6 of the Design
Directive. A design is not considered to be in the prior art if it could not
reasonably have become known in the normal course of business to the
circles specialized in the sector concerned, operating within the Community.
The Green Paper indicates that the relevant circles would comprise the
specialists, designers, merchants and manufacturers operating in the sector
concerned. This exclusion is called the «safeguard clause».
A design will not be deemed to have been made available to the public
for the sole reason that it has been disclosed to a third person under explicit
or implicit conditions of confidentiality. Since there are no harmonized
standards for the confidentiality concept within European Union, the
determination of conditions of confidentiality will necessarily rely on the
different laws of the Member States.
In addition, a design is excluded from the prior art if it was disclosed by
the designer, his successor in title, or a third person as a result of inforination
provided or action taken by the designer, or his successor in title during the
W. CORNISH-D. LLEWELYN, International property: Patent, copyright, Trade Marks and
Allied Rights, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 2007, 6th Edition, P.576, para 15-17.
22

--- Page 19 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
12-month period before the date of filing of the application or, if priority
is claimed, the date of priority. The rational behind allowing a designer
12-month grace period is to enable him to test the reaction of the consumers
and the market and to evaluate the viability of his design before applying for
registration.
Also, a design is excluded from the prior art if it has been made available
to the public as a consequence of an abusive disclosure. This case could
happen if a design was stolen from the designer or his successor in title.
The critical date for considering existing prior art in order to examine
novelty requirement is the filing date of the application for registration or, if
priority is claimed, the date of priority.
Concerning with the nature of novelty requirement, it is stated that the
European legislator adopts relative novelty as opposed to absolute novelty;
this is effected by introducing the concept of reasonable Community trade
knowledge 1. So, the public availability is the knowledge of the specialized
circles within the territory of the community.
However, this novelty criterion is criticized on ground that in the age of
the Internet every part of the world is connected so this kind of knowledge
is questionable. Furthermore, the specialized circle of designers is relatively
small and designers keep close contact with each other in international
organizations like ICSID 2.
C.2. Individual character:
Article 5 of the Design Directive stipulates that «l. A design shall be
considered to have individual character if the overall impression it produces
on the informed user differs from the overall impression produced on such
a user by any design which has been made available to the public before the
date of filing of the application for registration or, if priority is claimed, the
date of priority. 2. In assessing individual character, the degree of freedom
of the designer in developing the design shall be taken into consideration.»
T'he secona requrement for design protection is that a design must
have individual character. An industrial design satishies individual character
requirement if the overall impression it produces on the informed user
differs from the overall impression produced on such a user by any design
has been made available to the public.
1. U. Suthersanen, Design Law in Europe, supra at note 27, P. 43, para 6-058
.2
T. BEZZEGH, Main Features Of The Harmonized European Design Law, European
Integration Studies, volume 3, No. 1, 2004, P. 6.
Volume 1 - Danoniya 23

--- Page 20 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
A comparison must be made between a design for Which protection is
sought and any prior design to determine whether a design has individuality
Or not. The expression «overall impression» lets me say that the comparisor
must focus on designs as a whole regardless ot the detailed ditterences
between them. The common features must be given more weight than
differences. If the comparison reveals that the overall impression is similar,
the design under review will lack individual character.
As an industrial design is an important tool for marketing the products,
so if the comparison shows that a new design has difference that can have an
influence on market success of the product to which it is applied, individual
character requirement is present.
In this context it should be considered that the assessment of individual
character does not necessitate determination of quality of a design, but it
requires that there is a notable or obvious difference when comparing the
overall impression produced by a new design on an informed user with the
overall impression produced by prior design on such a user.
According to Recital (13) of the Design Directive, the assessment as to
whether a design has individual character should be based on whether the
overall impression produced on an informed user viewing the design clearly
differs from that produced on him by the existing design corpus. Thus, the
comparison will rely on a visual test as determined by the informed user.
Additionally, this Recital set out relevant factors which should be taken
into consideration during the comparison. These factors include, inter alia,
the nature of the product to which the design is applied or in which it is
incorporated, and the industrial sector to which it belongs.
The prior art of individual character requirement is the same as that
of novelty requirement, that is, comparison has to be made between new
design and any design which has been published, exhibited, used in trade or
otherwise disclosed. This prior art is subject to the same exceptions which
have been discussed above.
The relevant date to identify the prior art in order to determine the
Individual character requirement is, also, the sameas the novelty requirement
hat is, the filing date of the application for registration or, if priority 1s
claimed, the date of priority.
The measurement of the individual character of a design depends on the
opinion of the informed user. The early commentaries suggest that, in line
with the design is a marketing tool» theory, the informed user will, though
not necessarily, be the end consumer of the product 1.
24

--- Page 21 ---
حث باللغة الانجليزية
The term «informed user» could be interpreted to mean a designer who
specializes in a certain area of production, or a designer who is generally
informed about the market, or an attentive consumer in the market sphere.
The European legislature does not require an expertise or special knowledge
of all details of a design by the informed user but his general impression. It
appears that the informed user shall know more than the average person, that
is, he shall have a certain amount of experience in the field of the respective
product, or shall at least be aware of this field and similar prior designs 2.
In my view the informed user means the attentive consumer. He differs
from the average consumer and the skilled designer. He is in a middle
position between both of them, that is, he has general knowledge about
the relevant industrial sector to which the design applies and the similar
preceding designs more than the average consumer and less than the skilled
designer. Consequently, the individual character of a design is determined
by the eye of the attentive consumer. It should be noted that this criterion is
different from that of the assessment of the novelty of a design, namely, the
expert›s eye.
The degree of freedom of the designer in developing the design shall be
taken into consideration to assess the individual character requirement. To
determine the designer›s freedom, the courts should look at the standardized
features within a particular design or field of product and the environment
of the creation.
The degree of designer›s freedom in developing the design means that
where there is little scope for differences, then relatively little differences from
the prior design will be needed to find the individual character requirement,
and conversely where design freedom level is great, larger differences are
required 3.
The courts follow a four level test to decide upon the in dividual character
requirement 1. First, the courts will assume the mantle of the relevant
informed uset. It depends on the kind of product. The application tol
egistration is relevant in this regard. Second. the courts have to estimate
the probable level of the informed users knowledge. Third, the courts
determine the boundaries of the existing design corpus within the relevant
.1
Suthersanen, Design Law in Europe, supra at note 27, p. 39, para 6-04
U. KOSCHTIAL, Design Law: Individual Character, Visibilitv and Functionality, in 36 ]
2005, 297 ff., at 299.
.3
D. MUSKER, Community Design Law-Principles and Practice, supra at note 25, p. 33, para
.1-057
Volume 1 - Danoniya 25

--- Page 22 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
territory. Fourth, the overall impression of new design is compared with that
of formerly known design.
C.3. Visibility:
According to Article 3(3) of the Design Directive, the visibility is a
condition for registered design protection. Only designs of component parts
lre subject to this condition. A design which constitutes a component par
›t a complex product must be remain visible during the normal use once 1
has been incorporated into a complex product. Moreover, the visible features
of the component part have to fulfill in themselves the requirements as to
noveltv and individual character.
The visibility means that a design can be visible by the average observer
with ordinary effort. This indicates that one could demand that the average
observer uses glasses, but not a microscope, moreover, visibility dose not
necessitate that a design must be visible at all times 2.
This legal norm is confined to the concept of complex product, e.g. a
vehicle as a whole is a complex product, while wing mirror and steering
wheel of that vehicle could constitute component parts which must remain
visible during the normal use of such vehicle to be protected.
The visibility of a component part of a complex product is a new concept
in the European legal system since it concerns parts design of a product
whereas the traditional legal norm concerning with product design as a
whole and not parts of it.
Once a component part has been incorporated into a complex product, it
muSt remain visible during normal use of such product. The tern «normal
use» means the final use ot the product by the end user and not exposition of
such product for sale. Consequently, uses by vrtue of repair, mantenance,
servicing or care are excluded from the concept of normal use.
According to Article 3(1) of the Design Directive, a design must be
* derign must bg
registered to be protected. Member States are required to protect industrial
lesigns through registration. However, It 1s said that this merely means that
1 registration-based system must be established in each Member States. Tht
Design Directive does not prevent supplementary protection of designs by
other means including unregistered design right or copyright 1.
This allowed the Commission to develop the protection of design through
.1
.2
U. Suthersanen, Design Law in Europe, supra at note 27, Pp. 39-40, para 6-048.
U. KOSCHTIAL, Design Law: Individual Character, Visibility and Functionality, supra at
note 40, P. 310.
26

--- Page 23 ---
حث باللغة الانجليزية
providing for a new means of protection which is unregistered Community
design by the Council Regulation (EC) No. 6/2002 on Community designs
2. The Regulation states that an unregistered Community design is
automatically protected for a period of three years as of the date on which
the design was first made available to the public within the territory of
European Union. The substantive provisions of that Regulation concerning
with definitions of key terms, requirements for protection, exceptions,
exclusive rights and scope of protection are identical to the corresponding
provisions of the Design Directive.
It must be noted that Article 17 of the Design Directive allows Member
States to protect design by copyright law. According to this Article, a design
protected by a design right registered in a Member State in accordance with
the Design Directive shall also be eligible for protection under the copyright
law ot that State as trom the date on which the design was created or fixed in
any form. Each Member State is free to determine the extent to which, and
the conditions under which, copyright protection is conferred, including
the level of originality required. This discretion granted to Member States
may conflict with the main purpose of the Design Directive which is
harmonization of national design laws throughout Europe.
Section two
The requirements for protection of Industrial Designs
under the Egyptian Law
The Egyptian Law on the Protection of Intellectual Property Rights No.
82 0f 2002 (the Egyptian Law) replaced a collection of laws enacted over fifty
years ago with a umhed body ot laws that brings Egypuan lP legislation inte
line with most of the developed world and the various intellectual property
treaties to which it is a party. The Egyptian Law regulates the protection of
industrial designs and registration proceedings in the Articles from 119 to
137 thereof. This section of the paper will focus on the definition of industrial
design and model, excluded subject matters and protection requirements in
accordance with the Egyptian Law.
A- Definition of industrial design and model:
Article 119 of the Egyptian Law provides that «An industrial design or
model is any composition of lines or any three-dimensional form whether
.2
U. Suthersanen, Design Law in Europe, supra at note 27, p. 44, para 6-066.
The Council Regulation (EC) No. 6/2002 of 12th December, 2001 on Community designs,
which came inro force on 6th March, 2002.
volume 1 - Oanoniya 27

--- Page 24 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
or not associated with colors provided that such composition or form gives
a special appearance of novelty and is industrially applicable.»
It is clear that the Egyptian Law differentiates expressly between industrial
design and industrial model. An industrial design is two-dimensional shape
on the surface of a product to make it attractive and distinctive. It 1s dehnec
as any arrangement of lines with or without colors if it is distinctively novel
and applicable for industrial use. It may be drawings of nature or parallel
lines or squares. For example, patterns on carpets and masterpieces.
An industrial model is the three-dimensional form of a product. It
represents the shape of a product itself which gives it an aesthetic appearance.
For example, the shape of perfume bottle. In addition, an industrial model
may be concurrently protected as trademark if it satisfies the conditions of
trademark protection.
It should be noted that the making of both design and model could be
done manually or automatically in order to make a product, to which it is
appliea, distinctive from identical or similar products. An industrial design
or model is required to have a special appearance ot novelty and industrial
applicability to be afforded with legal protection. These conditions will be
explained later.
B- Excluded subject matters:
Article 124 of the Egyptian Law stipulates that «The following are
industrial designs or models that shall not be registered:
1- A design or model necessitated by the customary technical or functional
considerations of the product.
2- A design or model which includes slogans, religious symbols, seals or
flags of the Arab Republic of Egypt or any foreign country, or if consequences
of its utilization results in breach of public order or morality.
3- A design or model that is identical, similar or resembles a registered
trademark or a well-known mark...»
The Egyptian legislature excludes expressly three subject matters from
design protection. First, an industrial design or model whose shape is
basically due to the technical or functional requirements of the product
shall not be registered. This exclusion is justihed by that the protection of
the technical or functional considerations of the product would prevent the
competition in the market.
Additionally, this exception goes well with Article 25(1) of the TRIPs
Agreement which allows Member States to exclude the technical or
28

--- Page 25 ---
حث باللغة الانجليزية
functional features from design protection.
Second, an industrial design or model which includes emblems, religious
symbols, stamps or tlags of Egypt or any other country can not be protected.
Moreover, if the use of an industrial design or model undermines public
order or offends public morality, this design or model can not be registered
It should be noted that this exclusion agrees with Article 25(1) of the
TRIPs Agreement that docs not prevent Member States from adopting
additional substantive requirements for design protection.
Third, an industrial design or model which is identical, similar or closely
resembles a registered trademark or a well-known mark is excluded from legal
protection in order to protect consumers against any potential confusion
However, the owner of a registered trademark may register his trademark
as an industrial design or model if it meets the protection requirements
›f industrial design. In this case, this design or model would enjoy dua
rotection during the term of protection of industrial design 1
C- Protection requirements:
The Egyptian Law protects industrial designs and models through
registration. This registration is effective with novely examination.
According to Article 119 of the Egyptian Law, an industrial design or model
must satisfy two main requirements to qualify for registration. An industrial
design or model must give special appearance of novelty as well as must be
industrially applicable.
C.1. Special appearance of novelty:
An industrial design or model must be distinctively novel, It seems clear
that use of word «appearance» covers all visual and tactile features of a
product. Moreover, the wording of «special appearance» could be interpreted
to mean that an industrial design or model has to have special features which
make it distinctive from any similar existing design in the prior art. in other
word, a design or model must not be copied from prior design or model to
be registered.
1. In fact this presumption has already occurred in Egypt in some cases. In my view the
main aim of che owner of a registered trademark is to be overprotected. However, I think
that there is no practical justification for this overprotection because the fact that design
protection should be limited in time, whereas trademark protection does not have a hinal
term, accordingly, the design will fall in the public domain after che end of limited term of
design protection whereas the trademark may last forever. In other words, I see that this
overprotection has no legal value since the trademark protection is stronger than design
protection.
Volume 1 - @anoniya 29

--- Page 26 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
The Egyptian Administrative Adjudication Court said that a design or
model must include amount of creativity and novelty in order to justify
granting the legal protection. The criterion of this protection is that a design
or model has to be new per se and must not be copied from preceding design
or model 1.
Since the Egyptian Law adopts worldwide novelty, the Industrial Designs
Office is obliged to examine the novelty of a claimed design or model before
registration. Therefore, it has to find the prior art in order to compare a
design or model as a whole with any prior design which has been disclosed
to the public anywhere in the world before the filing date of the registratior
application.
Such comparison does not focus on the detailed differences, so where
the Industrial Designs Office finds that a design or model as a whole has
a distinctive shape from existing similar designs or models, this design or
model will be considered new. In practice, the Industrial Designs Office
Telies on the national public record and Internet to hnd the prior art and tc
evaluate the novelty of a design or model.
It should be noted that the Egyptian Law does not provide specific
criterion to be used to assess the distinctive appearance of novelty of a design
or model, so that I can say that the novelty examination is to some extent
subjective process.
A design or model will lack novelty in certain cases in accordance with
Article 120 of the Egyptian Law which provides chat «An industrial design
or model shall lose its novelty if:
1- It has been disclosea, described or uses thereot are displaved to the
public prior to the filing date of the application for registration thereof.
However, an industrial design or model shall still be considered new if the
disclosure or description thereof has been made after the application for
the registration thereof in a Member State of the World Trade Organization
(WTO) or in a country that treats Egypt on reciprocal basis, or if it has been
displayed in national or international exhibitions, or it has been published
in a conference or in scientific periodicals, all these within a period not
exceeding six months prior to the filing date of the application for the
registration in Egypt.
2- It includes non-fundamental differences in respect of a prior industrial
design or model, or it is dedicated to another type of products other than
1. Egyptian Administrative Adjudication Court, 3rd May, 2003, case No. 8500 of year 52
30

--- Page 27 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
to which the previously industrial registered design or model was designed
for.»
Consequently, Article 120(1) of the Egyptian law states that a design or
model will not be considered new if it has been publicly disclosed, described
or exposed before the filing date of the registration application. This means
that the Egyptian legislature requires an industrial design or model must
have absolute novelty like patent. Furthermore, it was said that mere
explanation ot description of a design or model prior to the hling date of
che application for registration thereof is sufficient to say that such desigr
or model loses its novelty 1.
In this respect, the Egyptian Court of Cassation stated that the disclosure
of a design to the producers and traders before its registration will lead to
lack of novelty, so that every person can make or use this design without
authorization from the designer 2.
Nonetheless, the Egyptian Law stipulates that the disclosure or
description of a design or model would not affect its novelty if it has been
Carried out after the filing of a registration application in a Member State
of the World Trade Organization (WTO), or in a country which deals with
-gypt on Dasts ot reciprocity within a perod not exceeaing six months prio1
to the date on which the registration application was filed in Egypt
It should be noted that this exception agrees with the priority right set out
by Article 4 of the Paris Convention which provides that «Any person whe
has duly filed an application for a patent, or for the registration of a utility
model, or of an industrial design, or of a trademark, in one of the countries
of the Union, or his successor in title, shall enjoy, for the purpose of filing in
the other countries, a right of priority during the periods hereinafter fixed...»
It is known that the Paris Convention stipulates that the period of the
priority right is six months. It starts from the date of filing of the first
application for registration of an industrial design. Consequently, any
subsequent filing in any of the other countries of the Union before the
expiration of the period referred to above will not be invalidated by reason of
any acts accomplished in the interval, in particular, publication, exploitation,
or putting on sale of copies of a design or model.
In addition, the Egyptian Law excludes a design or model from the prior
art if it has been displayed in national or international exhibitions, or it has
been published in a conference or in scientific periodicals, provided that
1. S. Elkaliouby, The Industrial Property, Dar Elnahda Elarabia, Cairo, 2005, Sth Edition, p.
668, para 467
2. Egyptian Court of Cassation, 6th December, 1971, case No. 665 of year 41.
Volume 1 - Danoniya 31

--- Page 28 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
this display or publication has been occurred within six months prior to the
filing date of the registration application.
Consequently, the Egyptian Law gives 6-month grace period to the
designer during which he can display his design or model in national or
international exhibitions as well as publish it in a conference or in scientific
periodicals and journals. These acts will not affect the novelty of a design
or model as long as they have been made within a period not exceeding six
months prior to the filing date of the registration application.
According to Article 120(2) of the Egyptian Law, the novelty of a design
or model would be defeated if it was not essentially different from any
existing industrial design or model, or if it was intended for another kind of
products other than those of the previously registered industrial design or
model.
It is manifest that a design or model must include basic differences that
make it distinctive from any prior design or model in order to decide that it is
new and protectable. Moreover, a design or model has to have fundamental
differences from previously registered industrial design or model even if the
former is dedicated to another type of products 1.
C.2. Industrial applicability:
According to Article 119 of the Egyptian Law, an industrial design or
model must be industrially applicable. Industrial applicability indicates that
a design or model must be capable of being manufactured by industry or
handicraft to be registerable.
This requirement means that a design or model must be confined to
distinguish the industrial products. The industrial applicability must
be interpreted in broad
sense to include all fields of industry. Therefore,
designs or models which are printed in catalogues or advertisements to
be distributed among the public as well as pure artistic designs can not be
registered and protected under industrial design protection 2.
However, Article 140 of the Egyptian Law provides that «Protection under
this law is conferred to authors of literary and artistic works, in particular
the following works:
9- Works of drawings with lines or colors, sculpture, lithography, printing
on textile and any other similar works of fine arts...»
S. Elkaliouby, The Industrial Property, supra at note 48, p. 663, para 464.
Id, p. 670, para 469.
32

--- Page 29 ---
حث باللغة الانجليزية
Hence, the Egyptian Law allows protecting design or model concurrently
under industrial design protection and copyright if such design or model
is, at the same time, industrially applicable and has subjective artistic value.
No doubt that this dual protection of a design or model is very useful for
the designer since the term of protection conferred by the registration of an
industrial design is short i.e. ten years as of the date of filing the registration
application in Egypt and may be renewed once for a further period of five
years. Whereas the term of protection conferred by the copyright is authors
life and is extended for fifty years as of the date of his death.
It is worthy to say that Article 123 of the Executive Regulation of the
Egyptian Law on the Protection of Intellectual Property Rights states that
the Industrial Designs Office may remove words, letters, or numbers from
an industrial design or model if they are not indispensable fundamental
components of such design or model.
CONCLUSION
It could be finally concluded that the Paris Convention and the Berne
Convention oblige the contracting countries to protect industrial design,
yet, they don›t specify certain requirements for industrial design protection
whereas the IRIPS Agreement obliges the WlO Member States to protect
industrial design and determines the protection requirements, that is, a
design must be independently created as well as must be new or original to
deserve protection. Industrial design protection gives its owner a property
right which grants him exclusive use and exploitation of his creation by
excluding the others from using it without his consent.
Since industrial design has noticeable impact on the markering of
products and plays a significant role in promoting industry, trade, and
economic development, most countries implement their international
obligation to provide legal protection for industrial design in their domestic
legislations.
As we have seen, the European legislator protects industrial design
through registration, additionally, it protects unregistered Community
designs for a period of three years only from the date on which the design
was first made available to the public within the European Union whereas
the Egyptian legislator protects industrial design only by registration and
does not provide protection for unregistered design.
The European and Egyptian legislators follow to some extent the TRIPS
Agreement regarding the requirements for design protection. Both of them
require that a design or model must be novel to be conferred legal protection.
The assessment of novelty necessitates a comparison between the claimed
design and the prior art. This design will be considered new if it is sufficient
Volume 1 - anoniya 33

--- Page 30 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
different from the prior designs.
However, there is an important difference between the two legal systems
regarding the criterion of novelty which they follow. On one hand, the
European legislator adopts relative novelty. In fact, it seems to me that it
applies this kind of novelty in order to protect European designers against
any similar design has been disclosed outside the European Community as
well as to save time and cost of the novelty examination process. On the other
hand, the Egyptian legislator, like most countries, adopts absolute novelty to
register industrial design or model. So, the examination of novelty in Egypt
takes more time to be sure that the claimed design is sufficient different
from any prior similar design anywhere in the world
It should be noted that the European legislator does not require that
a design has to have industrial applicability to be registered, whereas the
Egyptian legislator stipulates expressly that a design or model must be
capable of being manufactured by industry to be protected
In addition, the European and Egyptian legislators provide grace period
during which the disclosure of a design or model to the public does not
defeat the novelty thereof. However, there is another difference between the
two legislators. The European legislator provides 12-month period before
the fling date of the registration application whereas the Egyptian legislator
stipulates 6-month period only before the filing date of the registration
application.
Finally, both legislators allow designer to seek protection ot his design
under copyright law beside the design protection. Indeed, copyright
protection is an important way to protect design since it lasts longer than
industrial design protection.
34

--- Page 31 ---
بحث باللغة الانجليزية
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Books:
B.G.GRAY-E. BOUZALAS eds., Industrial Design Rights, An International
Perspective, Kluwer Law International, 2001.
C. M. CORREA-A. A. YUSUF, Intellectual Property and International
Trade: the TRIPS Agreement, Kluwer Law International B V, The
Netherlands, 2008.
D. COHEN, The International Protection of Designs, Kluwer Law
International, London, 2000.
D. GERVAIS, The TRIPs Agreement: Drafting Historyand Analysis, Sweet
& Maxwell, London, 2003, 2nd Edition.
D. MUSKER, Community Design Law-Principles and Practice, Sweet &
Maxwell, London, 2002.
F.M ABBOTT-TH. COTTIER-F. GURRY, International Intellectual
Property in an Integrated World Economy, Aspen Publishers, Wolters
Kluwer, New York, 2007.
G. H. C. BODENHAUSEN, Guide to the application of the Paris
Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, BIRPI, WIPO
publication, 2004.
N. PIRES DE CARVALHO, The TRIPS Regime of Trademarks and
Designs, Kluwer Law International, London, 2006
S. Elkaliouby, The Industrial Property, Dar Elnahda Elarabia, Cairo, 2005,
Sth Edition.
U. Suthersanen, Design Law in Europe, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 2000.
Wrade Marks ad Allied Righes, Sweet o Mastelt 1.ondont, 2007, gut
WIPO Intellectual Property Handbook, Industrial Design and Integrated
Circuits, WIPO Publication, 2004.
Articles:
A. KUR, TRIPs and Design Protection in (F.K. Beier & G. Schricker
Volume 1 - Oanoniva 35

--- Page 32 ---
The Requirements for Industrial Designs Protection
The International Overview and National Appliction
eds.), From GATT to TRIPS: The Agreement on Trade Related Aspects
of Intellectual property Rights, Studies in Intellectual Property and
Copyright Law, 1996.
C.D. THORNE, European Community Design Regulation, in EIPR 2000.
K.A. LEVIN-M.B. RICHMAN, A Survey of Industrial Design Protection in
the EU and the US, in 25 EIPR 2003.
T. BEZZEGH, Main Features Of The Harmonized European Design Law,
European Integration Studies, volume 3, No. 1, 2004.
U. KOSCHTIAL, Design Law: Individual Character, Visibility and
Functionality, in 36 IIC 2005.
V. SAEZ, The Unregistered Community Design, in EIPR 2002.
Conventions and Legislations:
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights,
15th April, 1994, Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization, Annex 1C.
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, Berne,
9th September, 1886, which came into force on 5th December, 1887.
Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, Paris, 20th
March, 1883, which came into force on 7th July, 1884.
The Council Directive 91/250/EEC of 14th May, 1991, on the legal
protection of computer programs, which came into force on 16th May,
The Council Regulation (EC) No. 6/2002 of 12th December, 2001, on
Community designs, which came into force on 6th March, 2002.
The Directive 98/71/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 13th October, 1998, on the legal protection of designs, which came
into force on 24th December, 1998.
The Egyptian Law on the Protection of Intellectual Property Rights No.
82 of 2002, 2nd June, 2002, which came into force on 3rd June, 2002.
36

